ARB.P.1/2021 Page 1 of 13 
 
IN THE HIGH COURT OF DELHI AT NEW DELHI 
% Judgment delivered on: 27.01.2021 
+ ARB. P. 1/2021 & I. A. 31/2021 
 
CITY LIFELINE TRAVELS PRIVATE 
LIMITED ..... Petitioner 
 
 versus 
 
DELHI JAL BOARD ..... Respondent 
Advocates who appeared in this case: 
For the Petitioner: Ms. Manmeet Arora, Ms. Samapika Biswal 
and Mr. Harkirat Singh. 
For the Respondent: Mr. Ramesh Singh with Mr R. A. Iyer, 
 Advocates 
 
CORAM 
HON’BLE MR JUSTICE VIBHU BAKHRU 
 
JUDGMENT 
VIBHU BAKHRU, J 
 
1. The petitioner has filed the present application under Section 
11(6) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereafter ‘the 
A&C Act’), inter alia, praying that a Sole Arbitrator be appointed to 
adjudicate the disputes that have arisen between the parties in relati on 
to an Agreement dated 27.08.2012 entered into between the parties for 
performing the work of “Water Tanker Supply Services (WTSS)” for 
Zone-II (hereafter the ‘Contract’).

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 2 of 13 
 
2. The respondent (hereafter ‘DJB’) issued a Request for Proposal 
(RFP) bearing NIT No.07/RPC-I/(2011-12) inviting competitive 
tenders from agencies for operating Stainless Steel (SS) Water Tanker 
Services on hire basis for the purposes of supplying water through 
vehicle mounted water tankers in order to facilitate supply of p otable 
drinking water to different areas in Delhi. Such services were to be 
provided in five different Zones – Zone I, Zone II, Zone V, Zone VII 
and Zone VIII on identical terms. The subject dispute relates to Z one 
II. 
3. The petitioner submitted its bid pursuant to the RFP. After 
negotiations, an offer made by the petitioner was accepted and the 
DJB issued a Letter of Intent (LoI) dated 16.07.2012. Thereaft er, the 
DJB issued a Work Order under the cover of its letter dated 
21.08.2012 and on 27.08.2012, the parties entered into a formal 
agreement with respect to performance of the work “ Water Tanker 
Supply Services (WTSS) for Zone-II”. 
4. The petitioner claims that it has been diligently performing th e 
contract, however, the DJB has failed to make payments of the 
invoices raised by the petitioner. The petitioner claims that it had 
issued a notice calling upon the DJB to release the payments 
outstanding for the months of August, September and October, 2020 
and had also made representations in this regard. However, the 
petitioner claims that the DJB has failed to address the issues raised by 
it.

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 3 of 13 
 
5. In view of the disputes that have arisen between the parties, the 
petitioner issued a notice dated 20.11.2012 invoking the A rbitration 
Agreement as set out in Clause 8.1.2 of the Contract. It also suggested 
the name of a former Chief Justice of this Court for being appointed as 
an Arbitrator. 
6. Thereafter, on 25.11.2020, the petitioner filed a petition (OMP 
(I) (COMM.) 392/2020) under Section 9 of the A&C Act before this 
Court seeking certain interim measures of protection. The said matt er 
was listed for hearing on 01.12.2020 and 02.12.2020. On 02. 12.2020, 
this Court issued notice but did not grant any interim relief, as prayed 
for by the petitioner. Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner preferred 
an appeal – FAO(OS)(COMM.) 173/2020 – under Section 37 of the 
A&C Act impugning the said order dated 02.12.2020. 
7. The name of the Sole Arbitrator as suggested by the petitioner 
was not accepted by the DJB. However, the DJB sent a letter dated 
15.12.2020 responding to the petitioner’s notice dated 20.11.2020, 
whereby the petitioner had invoked the Arbitration Clause. Th e DJB 
proposed names of two persons, one being a former Chief Justice of 
the Patna High Court and the other being a former Judge of this Court 
to be appointed as Arbitrators. However, the same were not acceptable 
to the petitioner. Therefore, on 24.12.2020, the petitioner moved this 
application for appointment of an Arbitrator. 
8. After the petitioner had filed the present application, the DJB 
issued a letter dated 31.12.2020 nominating Justice (Retired) Iq bal

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 4 of 13 
 
Ahmed Ansari as a Sole Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between 
the parties. It is material to note that he was one of the two persons 
who were proposed by the DJB for being appointed as an Arbitr ator, 
in its letter dated 15.12.2020 
9. The respondent does not dispute the existence of the Arbitration 
Clause contained in Clause 8.1.2 of the Contract is relev ant and is set 
out below:- 
“8.1 DISPUTE RESOLUTION 
1) Any dispute arising out of or in connection with this 
Agreement shall in the first instance be dealt with in 
accordance with the escalation procedure as set out 
in the Governance Schedule. 
2) Any dispute or difference whatsoever arising 
between to this Contract out of or relating to the 
construction, meaning, scope, operation or effect of 
this Contract or the validity of the breach thereof, 
which cannot be resolved through the application of 
the provisions of the Governance Schedule, shall be 
referred to a sole Arbitrator to be appointed by 
mutual consent of both the parties herein. If the 
parties cannot agree on the appointment of the 
Arbitrator within a period of one month from the 
notification by one party to the other of existence of 
such dispute, then the Arbitrator shall be nominated 
by DJB. The provisions of the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996 will be applicable and the 
award made there under shall be final and binding 
upon the parties hereto, subject to legal remedies 
available under the law. Such differences shall be 
deemed to be a submission to arbitration under the

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 5 of 13 
 
Indian Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 or of 
any modifications, Rules or re-enactments thereof. 
The Arbitration proceedings will be held at Delhi, 
India.” 
10. Ms. Arora, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner referred 
to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Perkins Eastman Architects 
DPC &Anr. v. HSCC (India) Limited: Arbitration Application No 32 
of 2019 decided on 26.11.2019 and a decision of this Court in 
Proddatur Cable TV Digi Services v. Citi Cable Network Li mited: 
(2020) 267 DLT 51 and contended that the unilateral appointment of 
an Arbitrator by the DJB was not permissible. 
11. Mr Singh, learned counsel appearing for the DJB countered the 
aforesaid submissions. He contended that the decision of the Supreme 
Court in Perkins Eastman Architects DPC &Anr. v. HSCC (India) 
Limited (supra) was not applicable in the facts of the present case. He 
submitted that the said decision must be read in a restricte d manner. 
And, the said decision would be applicable only in cases under Section 
11(6)(a) of the A&C Act, that is, in cases where there had been failure 
on the part of a party to act in accordance with the agreed procedure 
for appointment of an Arbitrator. 
12. He submitted that the said decision must also be read in c ontext 
with an earlier decision of the Supreme Court in TRF Ltd. v. Energo 
Engineering Projects Ltd.: (2017) 8 SCC 377 . He submitted that in 
Perkins Eastman Architects DPC &Anr. v. HSCC (India) Limited 
(supra), the issue before the Court was regarding ineligibility of an

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 6 of 13 
 
Arbitrator to act as such under Section 12(5) of the A&C Act. He 
submitted that there was no dispute that a person whose relati onship 
with any of the parties fell within the categories as specifie d in the 
Seventh Schedule of the A&C Act would be ineligible to be appointed 
as an Arbitrator. He submitted that the said rationale was furth er 
extended by the Supreme Court in TRF Ltd. v. Energo Engineering 
Projects Ltd. (supra) and the Supreme Court held that once a person is 
ineligible by operation of law to act as an Arbitrator, he also cannot 
nominate another to nominate an Arbitrator. The Court had held that 
“it was inconceivable in law that person who is statutorily ineligible 
can nominate a person .” Mr. Singh submitted that the said decision 
was rendered in context of an Arbitration Clause, which provid ed that 
disputes and differences between the parties would be referred to 
“sole arbitration of the Managing Director of buyer or h is nominee”. 
He submitted that in the case of Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & 
Anr. v. HSCC (India) Limited (supra), the Arbitration Clause 
provided for an arbitration “by a sole arbitrator appointed by the 
CMD HSCC within 30 days from the receipt of the request”. 
However, the CMD, HSCC, had failed to appoint an Arbitrator with in 
the period specified and therefore, the concerned authority had lo st its 
right to appoint an Arbitrator. He submitted that the decision was also 
founded on Section 12(5) of the A&C Act which, inter alia, rendered 
an employee of any party ineligible to act as an Arbitrator. Th us, the 
said decisions would not be applicable in the present case.

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 7 of 13 
 
13. He earnestly contended that in the facts of the present case, the 
DJB had appointed a former Chief Justice of the Patna High Court as 
an Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by it and 
therefore, the question of an Arbitrator being ineligible under Section 
12(5) of the A&C Act did not arise. He relied on the decision of the 
Supreme Court in Central Organization for Railway Electrification v. 
ECI-SPIC-SMO-MCML: Civil Appeal Nos. 9486-9487 of 2019 
decided on 17.12.2019 and contended that in cases where an 
Arbitrator has been appointed from a panel of Arbitrators, the 
appointment was necessarily required to be in terms of the agreement 
between the parties. He submitted that in this case, the DJB had a 
right to nominate an Arbitrator and therefore, the appointment o f the 
Arbitrator could not be faulted. He also referred to the decision of the 
Supreme Court in Standard Corrosion Controls Pvt. Ltd. v. Sarku 
Engineering Services SDN BHD: (2009) 1 SCC 303 and contended 
that a party could not approach the court under Section 11 of the A&C 
Act without following the procedure as agreed upon. 
14. Ms Arora countered the aforesaid submissions. She submitted 
that the contention that the Arbitrators suggested by the DJB were 
from its panel is incorrect. She also referred to an Office Order bein g 
OO No.26 dated 17.12.2020, issued by the Office of the Law Officer, 
DJB and submitted that the said Office Order, for including the names 
of two former Judges suggested by the DJB on their panel, was issued 
on 17.12.2020 which was after the date when their names had b een 
suggested by the DJB.

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 8 of 13 
 
15. She also referred to a circular dated 25.08.2020, which sets out 
the procedure to be adopted for appointment of an Arbitral Tribunal in 
light of the judgments passed by the Supreme Court and the High 
Court. The said circular indicates that the concerned engineering 
officer is required to file a request to the High Court for appointment 
of an Arbitrator from the panel maintained by the Delhi Internati onal 
Arbitration Centre (DIAC) or at its own discretion. 
16. Mr. Singh countered the aforesaid submissions and stated that 
averments to the aforesaid effect were not included in the petition filed 
by the petitioner but were made in the rejoinder and therefore, the DJB 
had no opportunity to traverse the said averments. However, he stated 
on instructions that although the order including the nam es of the two 
Arbitrators suggested by the DJB was passed on 17.12.2020 and the 
decision to include them in the panel had already been taken on file on 
15.12.2020, that is, the date on which their names were sugge sted to 
the petitioner. He further submitted the Circular dated 25.08.2020 had 
no application in cases where the procedure for appointment of the 
Arbitrators had been agreed between the parties 
17. It is not necessary for this Court to examine the question 
whether the names of the Arbitrators suggested had been included on 
the panel of Arbitrators maintained by the DJB subsequent to them 
being suggested to the petitioner. This is because the Arbitrati on 
Clause does not provide for appointment of Arbitrators from any 
panel. It is equally unnecessary to examine the scope of the Circular

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 9 of 13 
 
dated 25.08.2020 as the scope of examination in these proceedin gs is 
limited. 
18. The contention that the decision in the case of Perkins Eastman 
Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Limited (supra) ought to be 
read in a restrictive manner is not persuasive. On the contrary, the 
said decision must be read in expansive manner. The efficacy of 
arbitration as an alternate dispute resolution mechanism rests on the 
foundation that the disputes would be adjudicated by inde pendent and 
impartial arbitrators. The decision in Perkins Eastman Architects 
DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Limited (supra) recognizes the 
importance of ensuring that Arbitrators not be appointed by persons 
who are otherwise interested in the matter so as to obviate any do ubt 
as to the impartiality and independence of the Arbitral Tribunal. T he 
necessity for instituting necessary safeguards for the same cannot be 
understated. 
19. In any view, the said issue is no longer res integra in view of 
the decision of a Coordinate Bench of this Court in Proddatur Cable 
TV Digi Services v. Citi Cable Network Limited (supra). In that case, 
the Court has observed as under:- 
“25. ………The argument of the respondent that in the 
Arbitration Clause before the Supreme Court in the case 
of Perkins was with regard to the power of a Managing 
Director to appoint an Arbitrator whereas in the present 
case it is the Company only merits rejection. First and 
foremost, one has to see the rationale and the reasoning 
behind the judgment in the case of Perkins (supra). The

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 10 of 13 
 
Supreme Court held that the Managing Director was 
ineligible from appointing an Arbitrator on the simple 
logic that a Managing Director of a Company would 
always have an interest in the outcome of the arbitration 
proceedings. The interest in this context takes the shape 
of bias and partiality. As a natural corollary, if the 
Managing Director suffers this disability, even if he was 
to appoint another person as an Arbitrator, the thread of 
biasness, partiality and interest in the outcome of the 
dispute would continue to run. Seen in this light, it can 
hardly be argued that the judgment in Perkins (supra) 
will not apply only because the designated Authority 
empowered to appoint an Arbitrator is other than a 
Managing Director.” 
20. The aforesaid decision has also been followed in several othe r 
decisions. In M/s Omcon Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. v. Indiabulls 
Investment Advisors Ltd. : OMP(T)(COMM.)35/2020, another 
Coordinate Bench of this Court considered an order passed by an 
Arbitrator rejecting the petitioner’s application under Section 12 of the 
A&C Act. In that case, the Arbitrator had been unilaterally appoin ted 
by the respondent. The petitioner contended that the unilateral 
appointment of an Arbitrator by the respondent company was contrary 
to the decision of the Supreme Court in Perkins Eastman Architects 
DPC & Anr. v. HSCC (India) Limited (supra). The Arbitrator 
rejected the said contention by holding that the decision o f the 
Supreme Court in Perkins Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. v. HSCC 
(India) Limited (supra) was not applicable as the authority to appoint 
an Arbitrator was not vested with any designated employee but wi th 
the respondent company. This Court did not accept this view. The

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 11 of 13 
 
Court referred to the decision in the case of Proddatur Cable TV Digi 
Services v. Citi Cable Network Limited (supra) and held as under:- 
“9. …….The ratio of the decision in Perkins 
Eastman Architects DPC & Anr. (supra) cannot be 
read in such a narrow manner as has been sought to be 
done by the learned Arbitrator. In my view, once the 
Managing Director of the Respondent Company was 
ineligible to appoint the arbitrator in the light of the 
decision in Perkins Eastman Architects DPC 
&Anr.(supra), the same would also bar the Company 
itself from unilaterally appointing the sole arbitrator.” 
21. The reliance placed by Mr. Singh on the decision in the case of 
Central Organization for Railway Electrification v. ECI (supra) is 
misplaced. In that case, the Arbitration Clause provided for the 
Arbitral Tribunal to be constituted by Gazetted Railway Officers or 
three retired Railway Officers above a certain rank. The petitioner 
(Railways) was required to send names of four empanelled retired 
Railway Officers and the contractor was required to suggest two 
names out of the said panel for appointment as its nominee. The 
General Manager was required to appoint one of the names out of the 
two names as suggested by the contractor as the contractor’s nominee 
and the remaining Arbitrator from the panel or outside the panel. T he 
Supreme Court noted that the procedure adopted also took into 
account the option of the contractor. The Court was of the view that 
since the agreement provided for the appointment of an Arbitral 
Tribunal out of the panel of serving/retired officers, the procedur e as 
agreed by the parties ought to have been followed. In the present case,

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 12 of 13 
 
the Clause does not entail any such procedure for suggesting any 
names out of the panel of Arbitrators maintained by the DJB. 
Therefore, the contention that the decision of the DJB to nominate an 
Arbitrator must be sustained since the Arbitrator appointed was o ne 
from the panel maintained internally, is unpersuasive. The question 
whether the DJB maintains a panel of Arbitrators is its intern al matter. 
The Arbitration Clause does not contemplate the appointment o f any 
Arbitrator from the panel of Arbitrators maintained by the DJB an d 
therefore, the decision in the case of Central Organization for 
Railway Electrification v. ECI (supra) is, wholly inapplicable in the 
facts of the present case. 
22. It is also relevant to mention that in Union of India v. M/s 
Tantia Constructions Limited : SLP (C) 12670/2020 decided on 
11.01.2021, a three judge bench of the Supreme Court upheld the 
decision of the High Court to appoint an independent Arbi trator and 
had dismissed the Special Leave Petition. However, since reliance 
had been placed by the petitioner on the decision in Central 
Organization for Railway Electrification v. ECI (supra), the Supreme 
Court had requested the Chief Justice of India to constitute a l arger 
Bench to look into the correctness of the said decision. The said order 
is reproduced below:- 
 “Having heard Mr. K.M. Nataraj, learned ASG 
for sometime, it is clear that on the facts of this case, the 
judgment of the High Court cannot be faulted with. 
Accordingly, the Special Leave Petition is dismissed. 
However, reliance has been placed upon a recent three-

ARB.P.1/2021 Page 13 of 13 
 
Judge Bench decision of this Court delivered on 
17.12.2019 in Central Organisation for Railway 
Electrification vs.M/s ECI-SPIC-SMO-MCML (JV) A 
Joint Venture Company , 2019 SCC OnLine 1635. We 
have perused the aforesaid judgment and prima facie 
disagree with it for the basic reason that once the 
appointing authority itself is incapacitated from 
referring the matter to arbitration, it does not then follow 
that notwithstanding this yet appointments may be valid 
depending on the facts of the case. 
We therefore request the Hon’ble Chief Justice to 
constitute a larger Bench to look into the correctness of 
this judgment. 
Pending application stands disposed of.” 
 
23. In view of the above, the present petition is allowed and Justi ce 
BS Chauhan, a former judge of the Supreme Court of India, is 
appointed as the Sole Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes that have 
arisen between the parties in respect of the Contract. This is subject to 
the Arbitrator making a necessary disclosure under Section 12(1) of 
the A&C Act and not being ineligible under Section 12(5) of the A&C 
Act. 
24. The pending application is also disposed of. 
25. The parties are at liberty to approach the Arbitral Tribunal for 
further proceedings. 
 
 VIBHU BAKHRU, J 
JANUARY 27, 2021/MK