A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1132 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED 
v. 
SMT. SOMWATI AND OTHERS 
(Civil Appeal No. 3093 of 2020) 
SEPTEMBER 07, 2020 
[ASHOK BHUSHAN AND R. SUBHASH REDDY, JJ.] 
Motor Vehicles – Accident – Claims – Compensation –
Consortium – Appeals filed by Insurance Companies q uestioning 
the judgments of the High Courts arising out of the award by MACT 
with regard to the compensation awarded in favour of the claimant s 
under two heads, i.e. ‘loss of consortium’ and ‘los s of love and 
affection’ – The appellants submitted that the amount granted u nder 
the head ‘loss of love and affection’ is wholly without jurisdiction 
and that National Insurance Company Ltd. v. Pranay Sethi and Ors . 
has only referred to spousal consortium and no other con sortium, 
hence, there is no justification for allowing the parental consortium 
and filial consortium – Held: The Constitution Bench in Pranay Sethi 
has referred to amount of Rs. 40,000/- to the ‘loss of Consortium’ 
but the Constitution Bench had not addressed the issue as t o whether 
Consortium of Rs. 40,000/- is only payable as a spousal consort ium 
– The judgment of Pranay Sethi cannot be read to mean that it la ys 
down the proposition that the consortium is payable only to the 
wife – Further, the Three Judges Bench in United India Insurance 
Company Ltd. has categorically laid down that apart from spou sal 
consortium, parental and filial consortium is payable – It was further 
laid down that ‘loss of love and affection’ is comprehended in ‘loss 
of consortium’, hence, there is no justification to award 
compensation towards ‘loss of love and affection’ a s a separate 
lead – Thus, the impugned judgments of the High Courts award ing 
consortium to each of the claimants in accordance with law wh ich 
does not warrant any interference – However, the submission of the 
appellant that there is no justification for award o f compensation 
under separate head ‘loss of love and affection’ is acc epted. 
Partly allowing the appeals, the Court 
HELD: 1. A three-Judge Bench in United India Insurance 
Company Ltd. versus Satinder Kaur alias Satvinder Kaur and others, 
(2020) SCC Online 410, had reaffirmed the view of two-Judge 
[2020] 10 S.C.R. 1132 
1132

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1133 
Bench in Magma General Insurance Company Ltd.. The Three- 
Judge Bench in the above case approved the comprehe nsive 
interpretation given to the expression ‘consortium’ to include 
spousal consortium, parental consortium as well as filial 
consortium. Three-Judge Bench however further laid down th at 
‘loss of love and affection’ is comprehended in ‘loss of consortium’, 
hence, there is no justification to award compensation towards 
‘loss of love and affection’ as a separate head. [P aras 33 and 
34][1044-H; 1047-C-D] 
2. The Constitution Bench in Pranay Sethi has also not 
under conventional head included any compensation towards ‘loss 
of love and affection’ which have been now further reite rated by 
three-Judge Bench in United India Insurance Company Ltd.. It 
is thus now authoritatively well settled that no compen sation can 
be awarded under the head ‘loss of love and affection’ . [Para 35] 
[1047-D-E] 
3. The counsel for the appellant has submitted that P ranay 
Sethi has only referred to spousal consortium and n o other 
consortium was referred to in the judgment of Pranay Sethi, hence, 
there is no justification for allowing the parental consort ium and 
filial consortium. The Constitution Bench in Pranay S ethi has 
referred to amount of Rs.40,000/- to the ‘loss of consorti um’ but 
the Constitution Bench had not addressed the issue as to whether 
consortium of Rs.40,000/- is only payable as spousal consortium . 
The judgment of Pranay Sethi cannot be read to mean that it l ays 
down the proposition that the consortium is payable only to the 
wife. [Para 38][1148-E-F] 
4. The Three-Judge Bench in United India Insurance 
Company Ltd. has categorically laid down that apart from spousal 
consortium, parental and filial consortium is payable. This Cou rt 
feel itself bound by the above judgment of Three Judge Bench. 
This Court, thus, cannot accept the submission of the a ppellant 
that the amount of consortium awarded to each of the claim ants 
is not sustainable. [Para 39][1148-G] 
5. This Court thus, found the impugned judgments of the
High Court awarding consortium to each of the claim ants in 
accordance with law which does not warrant any interferen ce in 
this appeal. This Court, however, accept the submission s of the 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. SMT. 
SOMWATI AND OTHERS

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1134 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
appellant that there is no justification for award of comp ensation 
under separate head ‘loss of love and affection’. The app eal filed 
by the appellant deserves to be allowed insofar as the award of 
compensation under the head ‘loss of love and affec tion’. 
[Para 40][1148-H; 1149-A] 
General Manager Kerala State Road Transport 
Corporation, Trivandrum v. Susamma Thomas (Mrs) and 
Others (1994) 2 SCC 176; Sarla Verma (Smt) and 
Others v. Delhi Transport Corporation and Another 
(2009) 6 SCC 121 : [2009] 5 SCR 1098; United India 
Insurance Company Ltd. v. Satinder Kaur alias 
Satvinder Kaur and Others (2020) SCC Online SC 410 
– relied on. 
Magma General Insurance Company ltd. v. Nanu Ram 
@ Chuhru Ram and Ors . (2018) 18 SCC 130; National 
Insurance Company Ltd. v. Pranay Sethi and Others, 
(2017) 16 SCC 680 : [2017] 13 SCR 100; Sangita Arya 
and Others v. Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. and 
Others (2020) SCC Online SC 513; M.H.Uma 
Maheshwari and Others v. United India Insurance 
Company Ltd. (2020) 6 SCC 400 – referred to. 
Case Law Reference 
(2018) 18 SCC 130 referred to Para 7 
[2017] 13 SCR 100 referred to Para 15 
(1994) 2 SCC 176 relied on Para 24 
[2009] 5 SCR 1098 relied on Para 26 
(2020) 6 SCC 400 referred to Para 44 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 3093 
Of 2020. 
From the Judgment and Order dated 25.02.2019 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad, in First Appeal from order No. 1894 of 2003. 
WITH 
Civil Appeal Nos. 3094, 3095, 3096, 3097, 3098, 3099 Of 2020. 
Pankaj Seth, Ms. Manjeet Chawla, Sudhir Naagar, Rohit Kumar 
Sinha, T. Mahipal, Nishant Singh, Abhishek Kumar Singh, Sunil Kumar 
Verma, V . N. Raghupathy, Advs. for the appearing parties.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1135 
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 
ASHOK BHUSHAN, J. 
1. Leave granted. 
2. These appeals raising common questions of law have been 
heard together and are being decided by this common judgment. For
deciding these appeals, it is sufficient to notice the facts in detail in Civil 
Appeal No. 3093/2020(arising out of SLP(C) No.23478 of 2019), 
New India Assurance Company Limited Versus Smt. Somwati and 
Others and brief facts in other appeals. 
3. All these appeals have been filed by three Insurance Companies, 
i.e., New India Assurance Company Limited, Cholaman dalam 
MS General Insurance Company Ltd. and The Oriental Insurance 
Company Ltd. questioning the judgments of the High Courts arising out 
of the award by Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (MACT) with regard 
to the compensation awarded in favour of the claimants under two heads, 
i.e., “Loss of Consortium” and “loss of love and affection.” 
Civil Appeal NO. 3093/2020(arising out of SLP(C)No.23478 
of 2019), New India Assurance Company Limited versus Smt. 
Somwati and Others 
4. Ram Jiyawan, the husband of Smt. Somwati died in a Motor 
Vehicle accident on 06.12.2001 leaving behind his widow Smt. Somwati 
and seven minor children. Claim petition No.7 of 2002 was filed under 
Section 166 of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, claiming compensa tion of 
Rs.15,25,000/-. The MACT by award dated 22.03.2003 allowed a claim 
of Rs. 1,67,000/- with 9% interest. An appeal was filed by Smt. Somwati 
Devi and others in the High Court being F.A.F.O.No.1894 of 2003. The 
High Court allowed the appeal of the claimants and awarded a 
compensation of Rs.12,54,000/-. Against the judgment of the High Court 
dated 25.02.2019, this appeal has been filed by the Insurance Company. 
The grant of compensation under two heads has been challenged in this 
appeal, i.e., item No. (vi) and (viii), which are to the following effect:- 
“(vi)Loss of love and affection= Rs.4,00,000/-(Rs.50,000/- to each 
of the eight claimants). 
(viii) Loss of Parental Consortium to claimant/appellant nos.2 to 
8= Rs.2,80,000/-(Rs.40,000/- to each of the claimants).” 
5. This Court while issuing notice on 24.04.2019 passed following 
order:- 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. SMT. 
SOMWATI AND OTHERS

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1136 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
“O R D E R 
Delay condoned. 
Issue notice returnable in four weeks limited to the issue 
whether both consortium and loss of love and affection could have 
been awarded by the High Court in this case. 
Dasti service, in addition, is permitted. 
Until further orders, there shall be stay of 2 payment of the 
compensation amount payable to the claimants towards claus e 
(vi) of the impugned judgment which reads as under : 
“Loss of love and affection=Rs. 4,00,000/- (Rs. 50,000/- to 
each of the eight claimants)” 
6. In pursuance of notice issued by this Court, the respondents 
have appeared and filed reply as well as written submissions. 
Civil Appeal No. 3094/2020(arising out of SLP(C)No.4801 
of 2020), New India Assurance Company Limited Versus Sangita 
Devi and Others 
7. Sanjay Kumar, husband of the respondent Sangeeta Devi died
of Motor Vehicle accident on 12.01.2015. Claim Petition bearing MACP 
No.862 of 2016 was filed by the respondents, which claim petition was 
allowed by Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, granting a compensation of 
Rs.17,71,000/- with interest of 9%. Claimants filed an appeal in the High 
Court. The High Court following the judgment of this Court in Magma 
General Insurance Company ltd. V ersus Nanu Ram @ Chuhru Ram
and Ors., (2018) 18 SCC 130, granted compensation for ‘loss of love 
and affection’ at the rate of Rs.50,000/- to each of eight claiman ts and 
similarly, under the head ‘Loss of consortium’ at the rate of Rs.40,000/- 
to all the eight claimants. Aggrieved by the judgment of the Delhi High 
Court, Insurance Company has filed appeal challenging the order of the 
High Court. 
Civil Appeal No. 3095/2020(arising out of SLP(C)No.4643 
of 2020), New India Assurance Company Limited Versus Azmati
Khatoon and Others 
8. Mohd. Hasibul Bassan, died in a Motor Vehicle accident on 
29.10.2007. Claim Petition was filed by respondents which has been
allowed by Motor Accident Claims Tribunal granting a compensation of 
Rs.17,32,776/- with interest. The appellant filed an appeal in the High 
Court. The High Court granted compensation under the head ‘loss of

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1137 
love and affection’ at the rate of Rs.50,000/- to each seven c laimants 
and Rs.40,000/- each to seven claimants under the h ead ‘loss of 
consortium’. Aggrieved by the judgment of the Delhi High Court, 
Insurance Company is in appeal. 
Civil Appeal No. 3096/2020 (arising out of SLP(C)No.5441 
of 2020), Cholamandalam Ms General Insurance Compan y 
Limited Versus Umarani and Others 
9. The deceased Krishnasamy met with a vehicular accident on 
07.09.2014 who subsequently died. Claim petition was filed by the 
respondents which has been allowed by Motor Vehicle Accident 
Compensation Tribunal granting compensation of Rs.13,60,000/-. Appeal 
was filed by the Insurance Company. The award under the head ‘loss of 
consortium’, an amount of Rs.One Lakh and award under the head 
‘loss of love and affection’ an amount of Rs. Three Lakhs was confirmed 
by the High Court, which is challenged by Insurance Company in this 
appeal. 
Civil Appeal No. 3097/2020(arising out of SLP(C)No.6381 
of 2020),New India Assurance Company Limited Versus Smt. 
Pinki and Others 
10. One Dinesh Kumar met with a motor vehicle accident on
11.06.2014 and died. Claim Petition filed by the respondents was allowed 
by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal granting an a mount of 
Rs.13,01,776/-. Claimants filed an appeal before the High Court which 
enhanced the compensation. The High Court granted compensation under 
the head ‘loss of love and affection’ Rs.50,000/- each to four claimants 
and under the head ‘loss of consortium’ at the rate of Rs.40,000/- each 
to four claimants. Aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, Insurance 
Company is in this appeal. 
Civil Appeal No. 3098/2020(arising out of SLP(C)No.7556 
of 2020), New India Assurance Company Limited Versus Nana k 
Chand and Others 
11. Gaurav died in a motor vehicle accident on 23.09.2010. Claim 
petition was filed by the parents of the deceased, which was al lowed 
granting compensation of Rs.4,83,348/-. Claimants filed an appeal in the 
High Court which was allowed. The High Court granted compensation 
of Rs.50,000/- each to both the claimants under the head ‘loss of l ove 
and affection’ and Rs.40,000/- each to both the claimants under the 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. SMT. 
SOMWATI AND OTHERS [ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1138 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
head ‘loss of consortium’. Aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court, 
this appeal has been filed. 
Civil Appeal No. 3099/2020(arising out of SLP(C)No.8250 
of 2020),The Oriental Insurance Company Limited Versus Smt.
Rinku Devi and Others 
12. Birbal Kumar met with an accident on 27.07.2008 resulting in 
his death. Claim petition filed by the respondents claiming Rs .Twenty 
lakhs was allowed by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal gr anting 
compensation of Rs.5,80,000/-. Insurance company filed an appeal. The 
Tribunal has awarded filial consortium at the rate of Rs.40,000/- to each 
of the claimants, i.e., wife, two children and fath er totaling 
Rs.1,60,000/-. The High Court in the appeal filed by the Ins urance 
Company further enhanced the compensation under the head ‘loss of 
love and affection’ at the rate of Rs.50,000/- to each of four claimants, 
i.e., enhancing total amount by Rs. Two Lakhs. Insurance Company 
aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court has come up with this 
appeal. 
13. We have heard learned counsel for the appellant as well as
learned counsel for the claimants. 
14. In all the appeals, only issue to be considered is with regard to 
award of compensation to the claimant under two heads, i.e., (a)loss of 
consortium and (b) loss of love and affection. With regard to ‘consortium’, 
the question is as to whether it is only the wife who is e ntitled for 
consortium or the consortium can be awarded to children and parent s 
also. 
15. Learned counsel for the appellants contends that the 
Constitution Bench of this Court in National Insurance Company Ltd. 
V ersus Pranay Sethi and Others, (2017) 16 SCC 680, has laid down 
that there are only three conventional heads namely (i)‘loss of es tate’, 
(ii)‘loss of consortium’ and (iii)‘funeral expenses’, for which the amount 
determined by the Constitution Bench is Rs.15,000/-, Rs.40,000/- and
Rs.15,000/- respectively. Thus, the total amount under conventional head 
was Rs.70,000/- and the amount under conventional heads could not 
exceed Rs.70,000/-. 
16. It is submitted that the amount granted under the head ‘loss of 
love and affection’ is wholly without jurisdiction and further amount 
granted under the head ‘consortium’ could not be mo re than

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1139 
Rs.40,000/- and the amount of ‘consortium’ is only payable to wife who 
is entitled to Rs.40,000/- and the Tribunals and the High Courts committed 
error in awarding amount of consortium to each of the claimant, i.e., 
wife, children and parents. 
17. It is submitted that even after the Constitution Bench Judgment, 
this Court has allowed amounts under conventional heads as ‘los s of 
state’ Rs.15,000/-, ‘consortium’ Rs.40,000/- and ‘funeral e xpenses’ 
Rs.15,000/-. It is submitted that after the judgment of Pranay Sethi , this 
Court had confined the payment under conventional hea ds as per 
judgment of Pranay Sethi , the impugned judgment of the High Court 
awarding compensation under the head ‘loss of love and affecti on’ as 
well as ‘consortium’ to each of the claimant is contrary to the l aw laid 
down by this Court and has to be set aside. 
18. An additional submission has been made by learned counsel 
appearing for the appellant in The Oriental Insurance Company ltd. 
Versus Smt. Rinku Devi and others . Learned counsel submits that 
although MACT has erred in allowing consortium to four claimants at
the rate of Rs.40,000/- but the High Court in the appeal filed by the 
Insurance Company further enhanced the compensation under the head 
‘loss of love and affection’. The compensation could not have been 
enhanced on the appeal filed by the insurance company when the 
claimants have not filed an appeal. Learned counsel further submits that 
the High Court further committed an error in directing the statutory amount 
deposited by the appellant along with the appeal to be deposite d in 
AASRA fund opened in Delhi High Court which ought not to have been 
directed since the appellant has raised substantial questions of law and 
the appeal deserves to be allowed. 
19. Learned counsel appearing for the claimants refuting the 
submissions of counsel for the appellant contends that the award to each 
of the claimants at the rate of Rs.40,000/- under the head ‘consortium’ 
is in accordance with law laid down by this Court. It is submitted that the 
award of compensation under the head ‘consortium’ cannot be given a
narrow interpretation. The amount under the head ‘consortium’ has rightly 
been given not only to wife but children and parents. Learned counsel 
for the claimant has supported the judgments of the High Court. 
20. Learned counsel for the parties have also placed reliance on 
various judgments of this Court, which shall be referre d to while 
considering the submissions in detail. 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. SMT. 
SOMWATI AND OTHERS [ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1140 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
21. We have considered the submission of the learned counsel for 
the parties and have perused the record. 
22. The expression ‘compensation’ is a comprehensive term which 
includes a claim for the damages. Compensation is by way of atonement 
for the injury caused. 
23. The claimant in a claim for award of compensation und er 
Section 166 of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, is entitled for just compensation. 
The just compensation has to be equitable and fair. The loss of life and 
limb can never be compensated in an equal measure but the statutory 
provisions under Motor Vehicles Act is a social piece of legislation which 
has been enacted with intent and object to facilitate the claimants to get 
redress for the loss of the member of family, compensate the loss in 
some measure and to compensate the claimant to a reasonable e xtent. 
24. We may refer to the judgment of this Court in General 
Manager Kerala State Road Transport Corporation, Triv andrum 
V ersus Susamma Thomas(Mrs) and others, (1994) 2 SCC 176. This 
court considering the concept of compensation under Motor Vehicle Act, 
1939, laid down following in paragraph 5:- 
“5....The determination of the quantum must answer what 
contemporary society “would deem to be a fair sum such as would 
allow the wrongdoer to hold up his head among his among his 
neighbours and say with their approval that he has done the fair 
thing”. The amount awarded must not be niggardly since the “law 
values life and limb in a free society in generous scales”. All this 
means that the sum awarded must be fair and reasonable by 
accepted legal standards.” 
25. In the above case also, this Court awarded the amount under 
the conventional head of ‘loss of consortium’. 
26. Another judgment which needs to be noted is the judgment of 
this Court in S arla Verma (Smt) and Others V ersus Delhi Transport 
Corporation and Another, (2009) 6 SCC 121 , in which judgment in 
paragraph 16, this Court while elaborating the “just compensation” laid 
down following: - 
“5....”Just compensation is adequate compensation which 
is fair and equitable, on the facts and circumstances of the case, 
to make good the loss suffered as a result of the wrong, as far as 
money can do so, by applying the well-settled principles relating

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1141 
to award of compensation. It is not intended to be a bonanza, 
largesse or source of profit.” 
27. This court also awarded an amount under the head ‘loss of 
consortium’ to the wife. 
28. We need to notice the Constitution Bench judgment in National 
Insurance Company Ltd.(supra) which case notices the earlier 
judgments of this Court where compensation was awarded towards loss 
of consortium. In paragraph 46, the following was laid down: - 
“46. Another aspect which has created confusion pertains to grant 
of loss of estate, loss of consortium and funeral expense s. In 
Santosh Devi, the two-Judge Bench followed the traditional method 
and granted Rs.5000/- for transportation of the body, Rs.10,000/- 
as funeral expenses and Rs.10,000/- as regards the loss of 
consortium. In Sarla Verma, the Court granted Rs.5000/- under 
the head of loss of estate, Rs.5000/- towards funeral expenses 
and Rs.10,000/- towards loss of consortium. In Rajesh (2013) 9 
SCC 54, the Court granted Rs.1,00,000/- towards loss of 
consortium and Rs.25,000/- towards funeral expenses. It also 
granted Rs.1,00,000/- towards loss of care and guidance for minor 
children. The Court enhanced the same on the principle that a 
formula framed to achieve uniformity and consistency on a socio- 
economic issue has to be contrasted from a legal principle and 
ought to be periodically revisited as has been held in Santosh Devi 
(2012) 6 SCC 421. On the principle of revisit, it fixed differe nt 
amount on conventional heads. What weighed with the Court is 
factum of inflation and the price index. It has also been moved by 
the concept of loss of consortium. We are inclined to think so, for 
what it states in that regard. We quote: (Rajesh case):- 
“17...In legal parlance, “consortium” is the right of the 
spouse to the company, care, help, comfort, guidance, society, 
solace, affection and sexual relations with his or her mate.
That non-pecuniary head of damages has not been properly 
understood by our courts. The loss of companionship, love, 
care and protection, etc., the spouse is entitled to get, has to be 
compensated appropriately. The concept of non-pecuniar y 
damage for loss of consortium is one of the major heads of
award of compensation in other parts of the world more 
particularly in the United States of America, Australia, etc. 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. SMT. 
SOMWATI AND OTHERS [ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1142 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
English courts have also recognised the right of a spouse to
get compensation even during the period of temporary 
disablement. By loss of consortium, the courts have made an 
attempt to compensate the loss of spouse’s affection, comfort, 
solace, companionship, society, assistance, protection, care and 
sexual relations during the future years. Unlike th e 
compensation awarded in other countries and other jurisdictions, 
since the legal heirs are otherwise adequately compensated 
for the pecuniary loss, it would not be proper to award a major 
amount under this head. Hence, we are of the view that it 
would only be just and reasonable that the courts award at 
least rupees one lakh for loss of consortium.”” 
29. In paragraph 52, the Constitution Bench opined that reasonable 
figures on conventional head namely ‘loss of estate’, ‘loss of consortium’ 
and ‘funeral expenses’ should be Rs.15,000/-, Rs.40,000/- and Rs.15,000/ 
- respectively. In paragraph 52, following has been laid down: - 
“52. As far as the conventional heads are concerned, we 
find it difficult to agree with the view expressed in Rajesh. It has 
granted Rs. 25,000/- towards funeral expenses, Rs. 1,00,000/- 
loss of consortium and Rs. 1,00,000/- towards loss of care and 
guidance for minor children. The head relating to loss of care and 
minor children does not exist. Though Rajesh refers to Santosh 
Devi, it does not seem to follow the same. The conventional and
traditional heads, needless to say, cannot be determined on 
percentage basis because that would not be an accep table 
criterion. Unlike determination of income, the said heads have to 
be quantified. Any quantification must have a reaso nable 
foundation. There can be no dispute over the fact that price index, 
fall in bank interest, escalation of rates in many a field have to be 
noticed. The court cannot remain oblivious to the same. Ther e 
has been a thumb rule in this aspect. Otherwise, there wil l be 
extreme difficulty in determination of the same and unles s the 
thumb rule is applied, there will be immense variation lacking any 
kind of consistency as a consequence of which, the orders passed 
by the tribunals and courts are likely to be unguided. Therefore, 
we think it seemly to fix reasonable sums. It seems to us that 
reasonable figures on conventional heads, namely, loss of estate, 
loss of consortium and funeral expenses should be Rs. 15,000/-,

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1143 
Rs. 40,000/- and Rs. 15,000/- respectively. The princi ple of 
revisiting the said heads is an acceptable principle. But the revisit 
should not be fact-centric or quantum-centric. We think that i t 
would be condign that the amount that we have quantified should 
be enhanced on percentage basis in every three years and the 
enhancement should be at the rate of 10% in a span of thre e 
years. We are disposed to hold so because that will br ing in 
consistency in respect of those heads.” 
30. In paragraph 59.8, the Court further held that the amount of 
conventional head should be enhanced at the rate of 10% every t hree 
year. In paragraph 59.8, following was held:- 
“59.8. Reasonable figures on conventional heads, namely, loss of 
estate, loss of consortium and funeral expenses should be Rs. 
15,000/-, Rs. 40,000/- and Rs. 15,000/- respectively. The aforesaid 
amounts should be enhanced at the rate of 10% in every three 
years.” 
31. The next judgment which needs to be noted is Magma General 
Insurance Company Limited versus Nanu Ram alias Chuhru R am 
and others, (2018) 18 SCC 130, the concept of consortium was 
explained in paragraphs 21,22 and 23 which are as follows: - 
“21. A Constitution Bench of this Court in Pranay Sethi 
(supra) dealt with the various heads under which compensation is 
to be awarded in a death case. One of these heads is Loss of 
Consortium. In legal parlance, “consortium” is a compendious 
term which encompasses ‘spousal consortium’, ‘parental 
consortium’,and ‘filial consortium’. The right to consortium would 
include the company, care, help, comfort, guidance, solace and 
affection of the deceased, which is a loss to his family. With
respect to a spouse, it would include sexual relations with the 
deceased spouse. 
21.1. Spousal consortium is generally defined as rights pertaining 
to the relationship of a husband-wife which allows compensation
to the surviving spouse for loss of “company, society, cooperation, 
affection, and aid of the other in every conjugal relation.” 
21.2. Parental consortium is granted to the child upon the premature 
death of a parent, for loss of “parental aid, protection, affection,
society, discipline, guidance and training.” 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. SMT. 
SOMWATI AND OTHERS [ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1144 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
21.3. Filial consortium is the right of the parents to compensation 
in the case of an accidental death of a child. An accident leading 
to the death of a child causes great shock and agony to the parents 
and family of the deceased. The greatest agony for a parent is to 
lose their child during their lifetime. Children are valued for their 
love, affection, companionship and their role in the family unit. 
22. Consortium is a special prism reflecting changing norms about 
the status and worth of actual relationships. Modern jurisdictions 
world over have recognized that the value of a child’s consortium 
far exceeds the economic value of the compensation awarded in 
the case of the death of a child. Most jurisdictions therefore permit 
parents to be awarded compensation under loss of consortium on 
the death of a child. The amount awarded to the parents is a 
compensation for loss of the love, affection, care and 
companionship of the deceased child. 
23. The Motor Vehicles Act is a beneficial legislation aimed at 
providing relief to the victims or their families, in cases of genuine 
claims. In case where a parent has lost their minor ch ild, or 
unmarried son or daughter, the parents are entitled to be awarded 
loss of consortium under the head of Filial Consortium. Parental 
Consortium is awarded to children who lose their parents in motor 
vehicle accidents under the Act. A few High Courts have awarded 
compensation on this count. However, there was no clarity with 
respect to the principles on which compensation could be awarded 
on loss of Filial Consortium.” 
32. A two-Judge Bench in Magma General Insurance Company 
Limited awarded the amount of Rs.40,000/- to father and sister of the 
deceased. Paragraph 24 is as follows: - 
“24. The amount of compensation to be awarded as consortium 
will be governed by the principles of awarding compensation under 
‘Loss of Consortium’ as laid down in Pranay Sethi (supra). In the 
present case, we deem it appropriate to award the father and the 
sister of the deceased, an amount of Rs. 40,000 each for loss of 
Filial Consortium.” 
33. A three-Judge Bench in United India Insurance Company 
Ltd. versus Satinder Kaur alias Satvinder Kaur and oth ers, (2020) 
SCC Online 410, had reaffirmed the view of two-Judge Bench in

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1145 
Magma General insurance Company Ltd. Three-Judge Bench from 
paragraph 53 to 65, dealt with three conventional heads. The entire 
discussion on three conventional heads of three-Judge Benc h is as 
follows:- 
“53. In Pranay Sethi (supra), the Constitution Bench held that in 
death cases, compensation would be awarded only under three 
conventional heads viz. loss of estate, loss of consortium and funeral 
expenses. 
54. The Court held that the conventional and traditional heads, 
cannot be determined on percentage basis, because that would
not be an acceptable criterion. Unlike determination of income, 
the said heads have to be quantified, which has to be based on a 
reasonable foundation. It was observed that factors such as price 
index, fall in bank interest, escalation of rates, are aspects which 
have to be taken into consideration. 
The Court held that reasonable figures on conventional heads, 
namely, loss of estate, loss of consortium and funeral expense s 
should be Rs. 15,000/-, Rs. 40,000/- and Rs. 15,000/- respectively. 
The Court was of the view that the amounts to be awarded under 
these conventional heads should be enhanced by 10% every three 
years, which will bring consistency in respect of these heads. 
a) Loss of Estate – Rs. 15,000 to be awarded 
b) Loss of Consortium 
55. Loss of Consortium, in legal parlance, was historically given a 
narrow meaning to be awarded only to the spouse i.e. the right of 
the spouse to the company, care, help, comfort, guidance, society, 
solace, affection and sexual relations with his or her mate . The 
loss of companionship, love, care and protection, etc., the spouse 
is entitled to get, has to be compensated appropriately . The concept 
of nonpecuniary damage for loss of consortium is one of the major 
heads for awarding compensation in various jurisdictions such as 
the United States of America, Australia, etc. English courts have 
recognised the right of a spouse to get compensation even during 
the period of temporary disablement. 
56. In Magma General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nanu Ram & Ors.,
12 this Court interpreted “consortium” to be a compendious term, 
which encompasses spousal consortium, parental consortium, as 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. SMT. 
SOMWATI AND OTHERS [ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1146 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
well as filial consortium. The right to consortium would include 
the company, care, help, comfort, guidance, solace and affection 
of the deceased, which is a loss to his family. With respect to a 
spouse, it would include sexual relations with the deceased spouse. 
57. Parental consortium is granted to the child upon the premature 
death of a parent, for loss of parental aid, protection, affect ion, 
society, discipline, guidance and training. 
58. Filial consortium 
 is the right of the parents to compensation in 
the case of an accidental death of a child. An accident leading to 
the death of a child causes great shock and agony to the parent s 
and family of the deceased. The greatest agony for a parent is to 
lose their child during their lifetime. Children are valued for their 
love and affection, and their role in the family unit. 
59. Modern jurisdictions world-over have recognized that the value 
of a child’s consortium far exceeds the economic value of the 
compensation awarded in the case of the death of a child. Most 
jurisdictions permit parents to be awarded compensation und er 
loss of consortium on the death of a child. The amount awarded 
to the parents is the compensation for loss of love and affection, 
care and companionship of the deceased child. 
60. The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is a beneficial legislation which 
has been framed with the object of providing relief to the victims, 
or their families, in cases of genuine claims. In case w here a 
parent has lost their minor child, or unmarried son or daughter, the 
parents are entitled to be awarded loss of consortium under the 
head of Filial Consortium. 
61. Parental Consortium is awarded to the children who lose the
care and protection of their parents in motor vehicle accidents. 
62. The amount to be awarded for loss consortium will be as per 
the amount fixed in Pranay Sethi (supra). 
63. At this stage, we consider it necessary to provide uniformity 
with respect to the grant of consortium, and loss of love and 
affection. Several Tribunals and High Courts have been awarding 
compensation for both loss of consortium and loss of love and 
affection. The Constitution Bench in Pranay Sethi (supra), h as 
recognized only three conventional heads under whic h 
compensation can be awarded viz. loss of estate, lo ss of 
consortium and funeral expenses.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1147 
64. In Magma General (supra), this Court gave a comprehensive 
interpretation to consortium to include spousal consortium, parental 
consortium, as well as filial consortium. Loss of love and affection 
is comprehended in loss of consortium. 
65. The Tribunals and High Courts are directed to a ward 
compensation for loss of consortium, which is a leg itimate 
conventional head. There is no justification to award compensation 
towards loss of love and affection as a separate head. 
c) Funeral Expenses – Rs. 15,000 to be awarded” 
34. The Three-Judge Bench in the above case approved the 
comprehensive interpretation given to the expression ‘consort ium’ to 
include spousal consortium, parental consortium as well as filial 
consortium. Three-Judge Bench however further laid down that ‘loss of 
love and affection’ is comprehended in ‘loss of consortium’, hence, there 
is no justification to award compensation towards ‘loss of love and 
affection’ as a separate head. 
35. The Constitution Bench in Pranay Sethi has also not under 
conventional head included any compensation towards ‘loss of love and 
affection’ which have been now further reiterated by three-Judge Bench 
in United India Insurance Company Ltd.(supra) . It is thus now 
authoritatively well settled that no compensation can be awarded under 
the head ‘loss of love and affection’. 
36. The word ‘consortium’ has been defined in Black’s law 
Dictionary, 10th edition. The Black’s law dictionary also simultaneously 
notices the filial consortium, parental consortium and spousal consortium 
in following manner:- 
“Consortium 1. The benefits that one person, esp. A spouse, is 
entitled to receive from another, including compani onship, 
cooperation, affection, aid, financial support, and (between spouses) 
sexual relations a claim for loss of consortium. 
• Filial consortium A child’s society, affection, and 
companionship given to a parent. 
• Parental consortium A parent’s society, affection and 
companionship given to a child. 
• Spousal consortium A spouse’s society, affection and 
companionship given to the other spouse.” 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. SMT. 
SOMWATI AND OTHERS [ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1148 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
37. The Magma General Insurance Company Ltd.(Supra) as 
well as United India Insurance Company ltd.(Supra) , Three-Judge 
Bench laid down that the consortium is not limited to spousal consortium 
and it also includes parental consortium as well as filial consortium. In 
paragraph 87 of United India Insurance Company Ltd. (supra) ,
‘consortium’ to all the three claimants was thus awarded. Paragraph 87 
is quoted below:- 
“87. Insofar as the conventional heads are concerned, the deceased 
Satpal Singh left behind a widow and three children a s his 
dependants. On the basis of the judgments in Pranay Sethi (supra) 
and Magma General (supra), the following amounts are awarded 
under the conventional heads:- 
i) Loss of Estate: Rs. 15,000 
ii) Loss of Consortium: 
a) Spousal Consortium: Rs. 40,000 
b) Parental Consortium: 40,000 x 3 = Rs. 1,20,000 
iii) Funeral Expenses: Rs. 15,000" 
38. Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that Pranay 
Sethi has only referred to spousal consortium and no other consortium 
was referred to in the judgment of Pranay Sethi , hence, there is no 
justification for allowing the parental consortium and filial consortium. 
The Constitution Bench in Pranay Sethi has referred to amount of 
Rs.40,000/- to the ‘loss of consortium’ but the Constitution Bench had 
not addressed the issue as to whether consortium of Rs.40,000/- is only 
payable as spousal consortium. The judgment of Pranay Sethi cannot 
be read to mean that it lays down the proposition that the consortium is 
payable only to the wife. 
39. The Three-Judge Bench in United India Insurance Company 
Ltd. (Supra) has categorically laid down that apart from spousal
consortium, parental and filial consortium is payable. We feel ourselves 
bound by the above judgment of Three Judge Bench. We, thus, cannot 
accept the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant t hat the 
amount of consortium awarded to each of the claimants is not sustainable. 
40. We, thus, found the impugned judgments of the High Court 
awarding consortium to each of the claimants in accordance with law 
which does not warrant any interference in this appeal. We, how ever,

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1149 
accept the submissions of learned counsel for the appellant that there is 
no justification for award of compensation under separate head ‘loss of 
love and affection’. The appeal filed by the appellant de serves to be 
allowed insofar as the award of compensation under the head ‘loss of 
love and affection’. 
41. We may also notice Three-Judge Bench judgment of this Court 
relied by learned counsel for the appellant i.e. Sangita Arya and others 
versus Oriental Insurance Company ltd. and others, (2020) SCC 
Online 513. Counsel for the appellant submits that this Court has granted 
only Rs.40,000/- towards ‘loss of consortium’ which is an indication that 
‘consortium’ cannot be granted to children. In the above case, M otor 
Accident Claims Tribunal has awarded Rs.20,000/- to the widow towards 
loss of consortium and Rs.10,000/- to the minor daughter towards ‘loss 
of love and affection’. The High Court has reduced the a mount of 
consortium from Rs.20,000/- to Rs.10,000/-. Paragraph 16 of the judgment 
is to the following effect: - 
“16. The consortium payable to the widow was reduced by the 
High Court from Rs. 20,000 (as awarded by the MACT) to 
Rs.10,000; the amount awarded towards loss of love and affection
to the minor daughters was reduced from Rs.10,000 to Rs. 5,000. 
However, the amount of Rs. 5,000 awarded by the MACT 
towards funeral expenses was maintained.” 
42. This Court in the above case confined its consideration towards 
the income of the deceased and there was neither any claim nor any 
consideration that the consortium should have been paid to other legal
heirs also. There being no claim for payment of consortium to other 
legal heirs, this Court awarded Rs.40,000/- towards consortium. No such 
ratio can be deciphered from the above judgment that this Court held 
that consortium is only payable as a spousal consortium and consortium 
is not payable to children and parents. 
43. It is relevant to notice the judgment of this Court in United 
India Insurance Ltd. which was delivered shortly after the above 
Three-Judge Bench judgment of Sangeeta Arya specifically laid down 
that both spousal and parental consortium are payable which judgment 
we have already noticed above. 
44. We may also notice one more Three-Judge Bench judgment 
of this Court in Civil Appeal No.2885 of 2020, M.H.Uma Maheshwari 
and others versus United India Insurance Company Ltd. decided on 
THE NEW INDIA ASSURANCE COMPANY LIMITED v. SMT. 
SOMWATI AND OTHERS [ASHOK BHUSHAN, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1150 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 10 S.C.R. 
12.06.2020. In the above case, the Tribunal had granted the amount of 
Rs.One Lakh towards loss of consortium to the wife and Rs.Three Lakhs 
for all the appellants towards loss of love and affection. The High Court 
in the above case had reduced the amount of compensation in the appeal 
filed by the Insurance Company. The High Court held that by awarding 
the amount of Rs. One Lakh towards loss of consortium to the wife, 
Tribunal had committed error while awarding Rs.One Lakh to the first 
appellant towards the head of ‘loss of love and affection’. Allowing the 
appeal filed by the claimant, this Court maintained the order of MACT. 
45. In the above judgment although rendered by Three-Judge 
Bench, there was no challenge to award of compensation of Rs.One
Lakh towards the consortium and Rs.Three Lakhs towards the loss of 
love and affection. The appeal was filed only by the claimants and not 
by the Insurance Company. The Court did not pronoun ce on the 
correctness of the amount awarded under the head ‘loss of l ove and 
affection’. 
46. We may also notice the additional submission advanced in
Civil Appeal No. 3099/2020 (arising out of SLP (C) No. 8250 of 
2020), Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. versus Smt.Rinku Devi 
& Ors. As noted above, we have taken the view that the order of the 
High Court awarding compensation towards ‘loss of love and affection’ 
at the rate of Rs.50,000/- to each of the claimants is unjustified which is 
being set aside in this appeal. We, further, in the above appeal also s et 
aside the directions of the High Court in paragraph 9 by which statutory 
amount along with interest accrued thereon was directed to be deposited 
in AASRA fund. 
47. In result, all the appeals are partly allowed. The award of 
compensation under the conventional head ‘loss of love and affection’ is 
set aside. The Motor Accident Claims Tribunals shall re compute the 
amount payable and take further steps in accordance with law. 
48. All the appeals are partly allowed accordingly. No costs. 
Ankit Gyan Appeals partly allowed.