[2017) 10 S.C.R. 199 
INTERNATIONAL ASSET RECONSTRUCTION COMPANY OF A 
INDIA LTD. 
v. 
THE OFFICIAL LIQUIDATOR OF ALDRICH 
PHARMACEUTICALS LTD. AND OTHERS 
(Civi1Appea1No.16962of2017) 
OCTOBER 24, 2017 
[RANJAN GOGOi, ABBAY MANOHAR SAPRE AND 
NAVIN SINHA, JJ.] 
Limitation Act, 1963: s.5 - D.elay - Condonation of-
Applicability of s.5 to proceeding under s.30 of the RDB Act -
Whether s.5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 can be inFoked to condone 
B 
c 
the prescribed period of 30 days, under s.30( 1) of the Recovery of 
Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993 (RDB Act), for preferring an appeal 
before the Tribunal, against an order of the Recove1y officer - Held: D 
711e RDB Act is a special law and a complete code by itself with 
regard to expeditious recoFery of dues to banks and financial 
institutions - The fact that the Tribunal may be vested with some of 
the powers as a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure does 
not vest in it the status of a Court - s.22( 1 ), in fact, provides that E the Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedures under the C.P. C., 
and can regulate its own procedures in accordance with natural 
justice - s.5 of the Limitation Act provides that the appeal or 
application, with the exception of Order XX!, CPC may be admitted 
after the prescribed period, if the applicant satisfies the court that 
he has sufficient cause for not preferring the application within F 
time - The pre-requisite, therefore, is the pendency of a proceeding 
before a court - The proceedings under the Act being before a 
statutory Tribunal, it cannot be placed at par with proceedings 
before a court - The Tribunal shall, therefore, have no powers to 
condone delay, unless expressly conferred by the statute creating G 
it - s.24 of the RDB Act makes the provisions of the Limitation Act 
applicable only to such an original "application" made under s.19 
only - The definition of an "application" under r. 2(c) cannot be 
extended to read it in conjunction with s. 2(b) of the Act extending 
the meaning thereof beyond what the Act provides for and then 
make s.24 of the RDB Act applicable to an appeal under s.30( 1) of H 
199

200 
A 
B 
c 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2017] 10 S.C.R. 
the Act - Any such interpretation shall be completely contrary to 
the legislative intent, extending the Rules beyond what the Act 
provides for and limits - The exclusion of any provision for extension 
of time by the Tribunal in preferring an appeal under s.30 of the 
Act makes it manifest that the legislative intent for exclusion was 
express - The application of s.5 of the Limitation Act by resort to 
s.29(2) of the Limitation Act, 1963 therefore does not arise - The 
prescribed period of 30 days under s.30( l) of the RDB Act for 
preferring an appeal against the order of the Recovery officer 
therefore cannot be condoned by application of s.5 of the Limitation 
Act - Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993 - ss.19, 24, 30. 
Recovery of Debts and Bankruptcy Act, l 993: Object of 
legislation - Discussed. 
Dismissing the appeals, the Court 
HELD: 1. The RDB Act was enacted to facilitate and 
D expedite recovery of debts due to banks and financial institutions 
by summary proceedings before a statutory Tribunal. Section 18 
bars the jurisdiction of any court or other authority in such matters 
(except the Supreme Court/High Court under Articles 226 and 
227 of the Constitution). The Act provides a complete procedure 
for institution of recovery proceedings, the method of its 
E enforcement including the right to appeal. The RDB Act is 
undoubtedly a special law and a complete code by itself with regard 
to expeditious recovery of dues to banks and financial.institutions. 
The fact that the Tribunal may be vested with some of the powers 
as a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, regarding 
p summoning and enforcing attendance of witnesses, discovery and 
production of the documents, receiving evidence on affidavits, 
issuing commission for the examination of witnesses or 
documents, reviewing its decisions etc. does not vest in it the 
status of a Court. Section 22(1), in fact, provides that the Tribunal 
shall not be bound by the procedures under the C.P.C., and can 
G regulate its own procedures in accordance with natural justice. 
[Paras 9, 10] [204-F-H; 205-A-B] 
2. Section 5 of the Limitation Act provides that the appeal 
or application, with the exception of Order XXI, CPC may be 
admitted after the prescribed period, if the applicant satisfies the 
H court that he has sufficient cause for not preferring the application

INfERNATIONALASSETRECONSTRUCTION COMPANY v. OFFICIAL 20 I 
LIQUIDATOR OF ALDRICH PHARMACEUTICALS 
within time. The pre-requisite, therefore, is the pendrncy of a A 
proceeding before a court. The proceedings under the Act being 
before a statutory Tribunal, it cannot be placed at par with 
proceedings before a court. The Tribunal shall, therefore, have 
no powers to condone delay, unless expressly conferred by the 
Statute creating it. An "application" is defined under Section B 
2(b) of the RDB Act as one made under Section 19 of the Act. 
The latter provision in Chapter IV, deals with institution of original 
recovery proceedings before a Tribunal. An appeal lies against 
the order of the Tribunal under Section 20, before the Appellate 
Tribunal within 45 days, which may be condoned for sufficient 
cause under the proviso to Section 20(3) of the Act. The Tribunal C 
issues a recovery certificate under Section 19(22) to the Recovery 
officer who then proceeds under Chapter V for recovery of the 
certificate amount in the manner prescribed. A person aggrieved 
by an order of the Recovery officer can prefer an appeal before 
the Tribunal under Rule 4, by an application in the prescribed D 
Form IH. Rule ?.(c) defines an "application" to include a memo 
of appeal under Section 30(1). The appeal is to be preferred 
before the Tribunal, as distinct from the appellate tribunal, within 
30 days. Section 24 of the RDB Act, therefore, manifestly makes 
the provisions of the Limitation Act applicable only to such an 
original "application" made under Section 19 only. The definition 
of an "application" under Rule 2(c) cannot be extended to read it 
in conjunction with Section 2(b) of the Act extending the meaning 
thereof beyond what the Act provides for and then make Section 
24 of the RDB Act applicable to an appeal under Section 30(1) of 
the Act. Any such interpretation shall be completely contrary to 
the legislative intent, extending the Rules beyond what the Act 
provides for and limits. Had the intention been otherwise, nothing 
prevented the Legislature from providing so specifically. [Paras 
11, 12] [205-C-D; 206-A-E] 
E 
F 
3. A comparative study of Section 30, pre and post 
amendment in the year 2000, reveals that the deemed status of G 
proceedings before the Recovery officer, as a Tribunal, stands 
denuded. Had the proceedings before the Recovery officer 
deemed to be before a Tribunal, entirely different considerations 
may have arisen. [Para 13] [206-E-F] 
H

202 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2017] I 0 S.C.R. 
A 4. The exclusion of any provision for extension of time by 
the Tribunal in preferring an appeal under Section 30 of the Act 
makes it manifest that the legislative intent for exclusion was 
express. The application of Section 5 of the Limitation Act by 
resort to Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act, 1963, therefore, 
B does not arise. The prescribed period of 30 days under Section 
30(1) of the RDB Act for preferring an appeal against the order 
of the Recovery officer therefore cannot be condoned by 
application of Section 5 of the Limitation Act. [Para 14] [207-E-F] 
c 
D 
Sakuru v. Tanaji (1985) 3 SCC 590 : [1985] 2 Suppl. 
SCR 109 - relied on 
A.R. Venugopal @ R. Venugopal v. Jotheeswaran & Ors. 
2016 (16) sec 588 - referred to 
Case Law Reference 
2016 (16) sec 588 
[1985] 2 Suppl. SCR 109 
referred to Para 8 
relied on Para 11 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 16962 
of2017 
From the Judgment and Order dated 10.07.2013 of the High Court 
E of Bombay in Writ Petition No. 1416 of 2013. 
WITH 
C. A. NO. 16963 OF 2017 
Ms. Madhavi Divan, Sr. Adv., Mahesh Agarwal, Anukur Saigal, 
F Himanshu Satija, E. C. Agrawala, Kishore Jain, Mahesh Agarwal, 
Abhinav Agrawal, Ad vs. for the Appellant. 
Arvind P. Datar, Sr. Adv., Ardhendumauli Kumar Prasad, 
Ms. Sushma Nagaraj, Ms. TarunaArdhendumauli Prasad, Namit Saxena, 
Pratap Venugopal, Ms. Surekha Raman, Anuj Sarma, Ms. Niharika, 
G Ms. Kanika Kalaiyarasan (for Mis. K. J. John and Co.), Rajeev Pandey, 
Rabin Majumder, Sanjay Bhatt, Abhishek Aggarwal, Advs. for the 
Respondents. 
H 
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 
NAVIN SINHA, J. 1. Leave granted.

INTERNATIONALASSETRECONSTRUCTION COMPANYv. OFFICIAL 203 
LIQUIDATOR OF ALDRICH PHARMACEUTICALS [NAVIN SINHA, J.] 
2. A common question of law arising for consideration in both A 
appeals is whether Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (hereinafter 
referred to as "the Limitation Act"), can be invoked to condone the 
prescribed period of 30 days, under Section 30(1) of the Recovery of 
Debts and Bankruptcy Act, 1993 (hereinafter referred as the "RDB 
Act"), for preferring an appeal before the Tribunal, against an order of B 
the Recovery officer. 
3. In view of the pure question of law involved, the facts of the 
case need not be elucidated. Suffice to observe that pursuant to a 
recovery certificate issued by the Tribunal under Section 19(22) of the 
RDB Act, the Recovery officer passed necessary orders under Section 
28 of the Act. An appeal was preferred by the aggrieved against the C 
same before the Tribunal, beyond the prescribed period of 30 days. It 
was held that Section 5 of the Limitation Act not being applicable to 
proceedings under Section 30 of the Act, the delay beyond the prescribed 
period could not be condoned. 
4. Ms. Madhavi Divan, learned senior counsel on behalf of the D 
appellants, submitted that the RDB Act was not a complete Code by 
itself. A mere expeditious procedure for recovery was not conclusive to 
infer express or implied exclusion of the Limitation Act. In the absence 
of an express exclusion of the.Limitation Act to Section 30, implied 
exclusion cannot be readily inferred, considering the nature of the rights E 
and interests of the borrower involved, raising issues with regard to 
fairness of procedure. By virtue of Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act, 
any implied exclusion is ruled out and the provisions of Section 5 of the 
Limitation Act will apply to proceedings under Section 30( I) of the RDB 
Act. 
5. Under Section 22(1) of the RDB Act, the Tribunal was not 
bound by the procedures of the Code of Civil Procedure and was guided 
F 
by the principles of natural justice, which would include the power to 
condone delay beyond the prescribed period of 30 days under Section 
30(1) of the Act. Section 19(25) provided for passing of necessary 
orders to secure the ends of justice, which again would include the power G 
for extension of the prescribed period. The scheme of the RDB Act 
does not exclude application of the Limitation Act to proceedings under 
it. Referring to Section 2(b) of the Act and reading the same in 
conjunction with Rule 2(c) of the Debt Recovery Tribunal (Procedure) 
Rules, 1993, (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules") it was urged that H

204 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2017] IO S.C.R. 
A an "application" filed under Section 30(1) of the Act was also amenable 
to condonation under Section 24 of the RDB Act. Section 20(3) likewise 
provides for condoning delay beyond -45 days in preferring an ?.ppeal 
before the appellate tribunal. 
6. Sh. Arv ind P. Datar, learned senior counsel for the respondents, 
13 contended that the RDB Act was a complete Code by itself with regard 
to recovery of dues to banks and financial institutions. Section 24 of the 
RDB Act applied only to an application made under Section 19 by a 
bank or financial institution, to the Tribunal for recovery of a debt. Section 
20(3) expressly applied to proceedings before the appellate tribunal only. 
The scheme of the Act manifests, that thl'. Legislature expressly intended 
C to exclude any extension of the prescribed period of 30 days under 
Section 30(1), which is further manifest from the amendment to the 
same in the year 2000 denuding the deemed status of the Recovery 
officer as a Tribunal, for purposes of the provision. 
7. The definition of"application" under Section 2(b) of the Act 
D was confined to Section 19 of the RDB Act only. Its meaning could not 
be extended beyond that prescribed u_nder the Act, by invoking Rule 
2( c) which had to be read with Rule 4 providing the procedure for making 
an application, inter-alia, under Section 30 of the RDB Act in the 
prescribed Form III. 
E 8. Shri Datar with all fairness also invited our attention to a two-
Judge Bench decision dated 01.07.2015 in Civil Appeal No. 4926 of 
2015, A.R. Venugopal@R. Venugopal vs. Jotlleeswaran & ors., holding 
that the delay in preferring an appeal under Section 30( l) beyond the 
prescribed 30 days was condonable by virtue of Section 20 read with 
p Section 24 of the RDB Act. 
9. We have considered the submissions. The RDB Act was 
enacted to facilitate and expedite recovery of debts due to banks and 
financial institutions by summary proceedings before a statutory Tribunal. 
Section 18 bars the jurisdiction of any court or other authority in such 
G matters (except the Supreme Court/High Court under Articles 226 and 
227 of the Constitution). Section 31 provides for transfer of pending 
cases from a Court to the Tribunal.. The Act provides a complete 
procedure for institution of recovery proceedings, the method of its 
enforcement including the right to appeal. The RDB Act is undoubtedly 
a special law and a complete code by itself with regard to expeditious 
H recovery of dues to banks and financial institutions.

lNIERNATIONALASSETRECONSTRUCTION COMPANYv. OFFICIAL 
LIQUIDATOROFALDRICHPHARMACEUTICALS [NAVIN SINHA,J.] 
10. The fact that the Tribunal may be vested with some of the 
powers as a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, regarding 
summoning and enforcing attendance of witnesses, discovery and 
production of the documents, receiving evidence on affidavits, issuing 
commission for the examination of witnesses or documents, reviewing 
its decisions etc. does not vest in it the status of a Court. Section 22( I), 
in fact, provides that the Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedures 
under the C.P.C., and can regulate its own procedures in accordance 
with natural justice. 
11. Section 5 of the Limitation Act provides that the appeal or 
application, with the exception of Order XXI, CPC may be admitted 
after the prescribed period, if the applicant satisfies the court that he has 
sufficient cause for not preferring the application within time. The pre­
requisite, therefore, is the pendency of a proceeding before a court. 
The proceedings under the Act being before a statutory Tribunal, it cannot 
be placed at par with proceedings before a court. The Tribunal shall 
therefore have no powers to condone delay, unless expressly conferred 
by the Statute creating it. In Sakuru vs. Tanaji, (1985) 3 SCC 590, it 
was observed that: 
"3 ... that the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 apply only to 
proceedings in 'courts' and not to appeals or applications before 
bodies other than courts such as quasi-judicial Tribunals or 
executive authorities, notwithstanding the fact the such bodies 
or authorities may be vested with certain specified powers 
conferred on courts under the Codes of Civil or Criminal 
Procedure. The Collector before whom the appeal was preferred 
by the appellant herein under Section 90 of the Act not being a 
court, the Limitation Act, as such, had no applicability to the 
proceedings before him. But even in such a situation the relevant 
special statute may contain an express provision conferring on 
the appellate authority, such as the Collector, the power to extend 
the prescribed period oflimitation on sufficient cause being shown 
by laying down that the provisions of Section 5 of the Limitation 
Act shall be applicable to such proceedings. Hence it becomes 
necessary to examine whether the Act contains any such 
provision entitling the Collector to invoke the provisions of Section 
5 of the Limitation Act for condonation of the delay in the filing 
of the appeal..." · 
205 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

206 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2017] !OS.CR. 
12. An "application" is defined under Section 2(b) of the RDB 
Act as one made under Section 19 of the Act. The latter provision in 
Chapter lV. deals with institution of original recovery proceedings before 
a Tribunal. An appeal lies against the order of the Tribunal under Section 
20, before the Appellate Tribunal within 45 days, which may be condoned 
for sufficient cause under the proviso to Section 20(3) of the Act. The 
Tribunal issues a recovery certificate under Section 19(22) to the 
Recovery offic~r who then proceeds under Chapter V for recovery of 
the certificate amounc in the manner prescribed. A person aggrieved by 
an order of the Recovery officer can prefer an appeal before the Tribunal 
under Ruic 4, by an application in the prescribed Form Ill. Ruic 2(c) 
defines an "application" to inclc!de a memo ofappeal under Section 30(1 ). 
The appeal is to be preferred before the Tribunal, as distinct from the 
appellate tribunal, within 30 days. Section 24 of the RDB Act, therefore, 
manifestly makes the provisions of the Limitatian Act applicable only to 
such an original "application" made under Section 19 only. The definition 
of an "application" under Rule 2(c) cannot be extended to read it in 
conjunction with Section 2(b) of the Act extending the meaning thereof 
beyond what the Act provides for and then make Section 24 of the RDB 
Act applicable to an appeal under Section 30(1) of the Act. Any ,uch 
interpretation shall be completely contrary to the legislative intent, 
extending the Rules beyond what the Act provides for and limits. Had 
the intention been otherwise, nothing prevented the Legislature from 
providing so specifically. 
13. A comparative study of Section 30, pre and post amendment 
in the year 2000, reveals that the deemed status of proceedings before 
the Recovery officer, as a Tribunal, stands denuded. Had the proceedings 
before the Recovery officer deemed to be before a Tribunal, entirely 
different considerations may have arisen. 
Old Section 30 before 2000 Section 30 post 2000 I 
amendment amendment 
us. 30 Orders of Recovery "S. 30. Appeal against the 
Officer to be deemed as order of Recovery Officer. 
orders of Tribunal- ( l J Notwithstanding anything 
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 29. any 
contained in Section 29. an person aggrieved by an order 
order made by the Recovery of the Recovery Officer made 
0 fficcr in exercise of his under this Act may.within 
powers under Sections 25 to 28

INTERNATIONALASSET RECONSTRUCTION COMPANY v. OFFICIAL 207 
LIQUlDATOR OF ALDRICH PHARMACEUTICALS [NAVIN SINHA, J.] 
(both inclusive), shal I be 
deemed to have been made by 
the Tribunal and an appeal 
against such orders shall lie to 
the Appellate Tribunal." 
thirty days from the date on I 
which a copy of the order is 
issued to him. prefer an appeal I 
to the Tribunal. ! 
2) . f I ( On receipt o an appeal 
under sub-section ( l ), the 
Tribunal may, after giving an 
opportunity to the appellant to 
be heard, and after making 
such enquiry as it deems fit, 
confirm, modify or set aside 
the order made by the 
Recovery Officer in exercise 
of his powers under Scctio11' 
25 to 28 (both inclusive)." 
14. The RDB Act is a special law. The proceedings are before a 
statutory Tribunal. The scheme of the Act manifestly provides that the 
Legislature has provided for application of the Limitation Act to original 
proceedings before the Tribunal under Section 19 only. The appellate 
tribunal has been conferred the power to condone delay beyond 45 days 
under Section 20(3) of the Act. The proceedings before the Recovery 
officer are not before a Tribunal. Section 24 is limited in its application to 
proceedings before the Tribunal originating under Section 19 only. The 
exclusion of any provision for extension of time by the Tribunal in 
rreferring an appeal under Section 30 of the Act makes it manifest that 
the legislative intent for exclusion was express. The application of Section 
5 of the Limitation Act by resort to Section 29(2) of the Limitation Act, 
1963 therefore does not arise. The prescribed period of 30 days under 
Section 30(1) ofthc RDB Act for preferring an appeal against the order 
of the Recovery officer therefore cannot be condoned by application of 
Section 5 of the Limitation Act. 
15. Insofar as A.R. Ve1111gopal @ R. Ve11ugopal (supra) is 
concerned, all that would be required to be noticed and observed is that 
the entire statutory scheme did not fall for consideration of the court in 
that case. 
16. The appeals lack merit and are dismissed. 
Devika Gujral J\ppeals dismissed. 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G