[2015] 10 S.C.R. 27 
MIS. MAAN ALUMINIUM LTD. 
v. 
COMMISSIONER OF CENTRAL EXCISE, INDORE 
(Civil Appeal No. 2830 of 2005) 
MAYOS, 2015 
[A. K. SIKRI AND R. F. NARIMAN, JJ.] 
A 
B 
Central Excise Act, 1944 - Schedule, Chapter 76 -
Show-cause notice alleging the appel/ant-assessee for c 
clandestinely removing some of the quantities of the finished 
goods manufactured by it - Demand of differential duty by 
adjudicating authority-The order of the authority confirmed 
by the Tribunal and the High Court - On appeal, held: The 
order was passed by courts below on the basis of admissions D 
of two employees of the assessee-company without adverting 
to the specific plea of the assessee explaining that there was 
no clandestine removal of the goods from the premises -
The statements of the employees cannot be read as 
admissions - Thus entire basis of impugned order gets E 
knocked off - Demand order is quashed. 
Allowing the appeal, the Court 
HELD: 1. In view of the reply to the show cause 
notice and the statements of the two employees of the F 
assessee-company, the findings arrived at by the 
CESTAT which are accepted by the Hi.gh Court are ~otally 
perverse and there is no such admission made by these 
two persons which has become the basis of the orders 
passed by the authorities below. Since there was no G 
such admission on the part of these two persons which 
is erroneously read out to be so, entire basis of the 
impugned orders passed by the Commissioner as well 
as the CESTAT gets knocked off. [Paras 7 and 12][34-F; 
36-E-F] H 
27

28 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 10 S.C.R. 
A 2. In spite of the factthat the plea was specifically 
raised by the appellant in explaining that there was no 
difference in the quantities and thus, no question of 
any clandestine removal of the goods from the 
premises, the said plea has not been adverted to, c.nd 
B there is no reference made to the material produced by 
the appellant. Only on the baais of so called admissions, 
the authorities jumped to the conclusion without 
undertaking any further exercise. Such an order of the 
CESTAT which is confirmed by the High Court, does not 
C stand legal scrutiny and therefore, these orders are liable 
to be set aside. [Para 15] [38-E-G] 
D 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 
2830 of2005 
From the Judgment and Order dated 21.06.2004 of the 
High Court of Madhya Pradesh Bench at Indore in M.A. No. 
1184of2004 
E S. Ganesh, Narendra Kamar, Vinod Mehta, Rakesh 
Kumar for the Appellant. 
K. Radhakrishnan, Shirin Khajuria, Rajiv Sharma, 8. 
Krishna Prasad for the Respondents. 
F The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 
A. K. SIKRI, J .. 1. The appellant herein is engaged in 
the business of manufacturing of Aluminium Profils, bars 
and roads, tubes and papers. These items which are finished 
G goods are subjected to excise duty and classified under 
chapter 76 of the Schedule to the Central Excise Act. 
Substantial quantity of the aforesaid goods manufactured by 
the appellant is exported. Some officials of the Central Excise 
Department visited the factory of the appellant on 16.08.1996 
H and checked the physical stock of the finished goods viz-

M/S. MAANALUMINIUM LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 29 
CENTRAL EXCISE, IN DORE [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
a-viz, the stock recorded in its books. On verification, A 
these officials found that several quantities of goods are 
unaccounted. These goods were, accordingly, seized. The 
raiding party also visited the office premises of the appellant. 
It went to the dealers of the appellant and recorded their 
statements as well. Statements of some of the employees of B 
the appellant company who were dealing with the affairs of 
the appellant were also recorded. 
2. On the basis of the aforesaid material and the 
statements recorded, the Department took the view that C 
the appellant had been clandestinely removing some of the 
quantities of the finished goods. On this basis, a show 
cause notice dated 03.03.1999 was issued to the appellant 
company as well as its managing director. Making out the 
case of evasion of excise duty and suppression of facts on D 
the part of the appellant, extended period of limitation was 
invoked, as per proviso to Section 11A(1) of the Central 
Excise Act. 
3. The appellant submitted its reply to the said show cause E 
notice contesting the position which was taken by the 
Department in the said notice. The appellant submitted that 
there was no clandestine removal of any quantity of finished 
goods and the raw material was in fact used in manufacturing 
the finished goods. F 
4. After hearing the appellant, the adjudicating authority 
passed the Order-in-Original dated 28.08.2002, raising the 
demand of Rs.64,82,565/-as differential duty payable by the 
appellant. The appellant went in appeal, which appeal was G 
dismissed by the Customs, Excise and Services Tax 
Appellate Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as 'CESTAT') as 
well vide its orders dated 22.12.2003. Relevant portion of 
this order which contains the discussion on the essential 
aspects is reproduced below:- H

30 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 10 S.C.R. 
"3.1 The company had cleared goods for export also. 
The export documents showed the "catalogue weight" 
of the goods, which was more than the actual (physical) 
weight recorded in RG-1 register. Consequently, the 
weight of goods actually exported was less than what 
was shown I the export documents viz. AR4s. Invoices 
etc. The SCN alleged that the differential quantity of 
goods had not been accounted and the same had been 
clandestinely cleared without payment of duty during the 
period February 1994 to January 1999. this allegation 
was also based on the finding that the "gate register" 
and other records seized from the factory premises had 
shown that goods had been cleared without invoice 
and without payment of duty. The demand of 
Rs.1,05,67,090/-was raised on a total quantity of 
641.145 Mts of goods which was allegedly cleared in 
the above manner during the above period, 
corresponding to which the total quantity of exports as 
noted by the Commissioner was 6507.073 Mts. The 
adjudicating authority has found that out of this quantity 
of total exports, the exports made to M/s Man lntertrade 
Co. (UAE) are not to be taken into account for 
demanding duty and accordingly it has requantified the 
demand as Rs. 64,82,565/-. Thatauthorityhasworked 
out this demand on the basis of the appellants own 
records and statements. For instance a letter issued by 
Sh. U. D. Selvan, Senior Engineer of the company, to 
their Indore office showed the catalogue weight of certain 
Aluminium Sections as 21986 Kgs. and its physical 
weight as 21404.2 Kgs. Shri Selvan, in his statement, 
confirmed this fact. Some official correspondence 
between functionaries of the company also indicated that 
the catalogue weight of export goods was 5-10% more 
than the actual weight. Shri Deepak Das, Senior 
Manager (Tool Room) who was confronted with the

M/S. MAANALUMINIUM LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 31 
CENTRAL EXCISE, IN DORE [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
letters, admitted that the catalogue weight (despatch A 
weight) was always more than the physical weight. Shri 
Prahalad Das Sarda, Excise (Officer & Authorised 
Signatory, stated that it was his function to make entries 
in RG-1 Register on the basis of the Packing 
departments reports which were prepared on the basis B 
of actual weight. But he could not explain as to how 
the differential quantity of goods was disposed of. He 
further stated that he had only acted as per the directions 
of the Managing Director and the latter alone could 
offer any explanation. Shri J.C. Mansukhani, in his C 
statement, admitted that in some cases of exports, the 
catalogue weight was higher than the physical weight 
and the differential quantity of goods remained in the 
factory. However, he could not say as to how this quantity D 
was disposed of. In the aforesaid example, the quantity 
of Sections exported under GP2 No. 58 dated 29.12.93 
was shown as 21e0s Kgs. (catalogue weight) whereas 
the actual weight was only 21404.2 Kgs. The differential 
quantity (581.8 Kgs.) was not actually cleared and E 
exported, though, in RG-1, it was shown as debited 
for clearance for export. Shri Mansukhani in his 
statement conceded this factual position but could not 
say as to how the 581.8 Kgs. of Sections remaining in 
the factory were disposed of. The Consultant for the F 
appellants submitted before us that J.C. Mansukhani 
and Deepak Das had been wrongly quoted in the SCN 
and the Commissioner's order. He added that the 
allegation of clandestine removal of goods had not been 
proved by the department. Yet another submission G 
made by the Consultant was that the difference in weight 
of the goods was less than 5 which according to him, 
was too negligible to be taken into account. The DR 
submitted that he demand of duty was based only on 
the differential quantity admitted by the appellants and H

32 
A 
8 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 10 S.C.R. 
hence was irresistible. We are unable to accept the 
Consultant's arguments as we have noted that the 
demand of duty of Rs. 64,82,565/-is based on the 
unrebutted documentary evidence gathered from the 
appellants premises as well as the unretracted 
statements of the Managing Director and other 
responsible functionaries of the company. We have 
perused these statements and find that the 
adjudicating authority has correctly quoted and 
appreciated the same. The statements were never 
retracted, nor, was any of the documents disowned. The 
result was that the differential quantity of goods i.e. the 
· difference between the actual (physical) weight and 
the weight shown to have been cleared for export was 
proved to have been removed from the factory without 
invoices and without payment of duty. The differential 
quantity was admitted but its accountal and clearance in 
terms of the legal provisions we.re not shown. (In view of 
the admission of the differential quantity by the company 
authorities, it was not necessary for the adjudicating 
authority to allow them to cross-examine any officer of 
the department). The department's allegation of 
clandestine removal of the said quantity stood proved. 
The appellants have stated that the total exports 
quantity noted by the Commissioner (6507.073 Mts) is 
not correct and that the correct figure must be less by 
95.614 Mts and, on this basis, the demand of duty should 
be reduced. We are unable to accept this claim as we 
find that the Commissioner has noted the above quantity 
from a report of the Deputy Commissioner of Central 
Excise Division II, Indore, which has not been called in 
question in these appeals. Yet another ground of 
challenge to the demand of duty is that many of the 
exports taken into account by the Commissioner had 
taken place prior to the period of demand. This, again,

M/S. MAANALUMINIUM LTD. v. COMMISSIONEROF 33 
CENTRAL EXCISE, INDORE [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
cannot be accepted as J.C. Mansukhani admitted A 
that the differential quantities remain.ed in the factory. 
Such quantities which accumulated from past exports 
could well be removed during the period of demand. 
We uphold the above demand of duty for the reasons 
recorded." B 
5. The appellant preferred further appeal to the High 
Court under Section 35G of the Central Excise Act. This 
appeal has also been dismissed by the High Court primarily 
on the ground that the two authorities below have looked c 
into the facts and law in confirming the demand arid a finding 
of fact has been arrived that it was a case of evasion of duty 
by resorting to clandestine manner in removing the finished 
goods and therefore, these findings do not call for any 
interference. Since the High Court has dismissed the· appeal D 
with the aforesaid observation, that was a reason for 
reproducing in detail, the discussion carried out by the 
CESTAT in its order. 
6. This is how the present appeal comes up for hearing E 
which challenges the orders of the authorities below . 
. In the first blush, the impression that would be gathered 
is that a finding of fact is arrived at by the authorities below 
holding that there was clandestine removal of the goods from F 
the factory premises of the appellant without the payment of . 
excise duty and therefore, no question of law is involved in the 
present case. However, the submission of Mr. S. Ganesh, 
learned senior counsel appearing for the appellant, is that 
from the reading of the order of the CESTAT, it becomes G 
apparent that the CESTAT has primarily been influenced by 
the statements of two employees of the appellant company 
viz., Mr. Deepak Das and Mr. J. C. Mansukhani and the 
entire order is rested on the so called admissions contained 
in the statement of these two employees. He submitted that H

34 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 10 S.C.R. · 
A from the . reading of the statement of the two employees it 
would be crystal clear that there was no such admission made 
by them at all and what is sought to be read into those 
statements is not there at all and is conspicuously missing in 
these statements. It was thus, argued that the present case is 
B a case of perverse findings. It is additionally a,rgued that when 
the Commissioner or for that matter, the CESTAT relied upon 
the so-called admissions of the aforesaid two employees, it 
failed to look into any explanation furnished by' the appellant 
in reply to the show cause notice and also in the form of other 
C materials produced before the adjudicating authority. It was 
also argued that even in the statements of the said two 
employees, these employees had amply demonstrated and 
clarified the doubts pertaining to the differential in quantity 
0 but the authorities have blissfully ignored those parts of the 
statements of these employees, which has resulted in 
miscarriage of justice. 
7. In order to substantiate the aforesaid statement, Mr. 
Ganesh took us through the reply to the show cause notice, 
E other documents filed as well as the statements of Mr.J. C. 
Mansukhani and Mr. Deepak Das. On going through this 
record, we are inclined to accept the argument of Mr. 
Ganesh that the findings arrived at by the CESTATwhich are 
F accepted by the High Court are totally perverse and there is 
no such admission made by these two persons which has 
become the basis of the orders passed by the authorities 
below. 
8. Before we advert to these statements, it would be 
G pertinent to mention here that the appellant had explained that 
there is a variation in the die hole between 5% to 7.5%, i.e., 
in the manufacture of dye.· It was a specific case put by the 
appellant that the hole of the die, after its continuous use at 
H Press machine for extruding the required section/ finish goods, 
the internal diameter always expanded to some· extent and

M/S. MAANALUMINIUM LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 35 
CENiRAL EXCISE, INDORE [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
therefore the dies are being manufactured accordingly so that A 
the produced output should match the specifications. It 
had also taken support of the technical literature that is 
available in the market, to prove the aforesaid assertion. 
On this basis, it was stated that in the export catalogue 
which was prepared and issued by the appellant in order to B 
take care of the final production with varying specifications 
because of the aforesaid reason, 10 per cent actual weight 
would be 5% more or less than the weight as mentioned in 
the catalogue. It was further explained that even as per the 
show cause notice, the difference in quantity was hardly 2 C 
percent. 
9. We find from the reading of the statements of Mr. 
Deepak Das and Mr. J. C. Mansukhani that this aspect is 
explained in abundance by them in their statements. After D 
reading the statement of these two persons, we find that no 
such admission was made by them, as recorded in the order 
of the CESTAT which is extracted above. Mr.Deepak Das 
had only stated that "In export dies, catalogue weight should 
be always equal or 10% than the physical weight". This is in E 
reply to Question No. 4 which was put to Mr. Deepak Das. 
For the sake of clarity and better understanding, we reproduce 
the exact question and answer given thereto: 
"Question-4 Please see page No. 359 of file 28, F 
seized from factory premises on 16.8.96 please explain 
the meaning of "we may follow the wt. Range in export 
dies from - 10% to 0%" as mentioned in the above 
said letter written by you to Mr. D. K. Chandwani Indore 
office on 8.8.94. G 
Ans In export dies, catalogue weight should be always 
equal or 10% than the physical weight." 
10. We fail to understand how it amounts to admission 
on the part of Mr. Das that the quantity disclosed was less. To H

36 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 1 O S.C.R. 
A the similar effect is the statement of Mr. Mansukhani which is 
treated as his admission. In this behalf, we reproduce question 
No. 5 and answer thereof which is taken as admission of Mr. 
Mansukhani: -
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
"Question 5: Please see page No. 137 of File 498 where 
catalogue weight for different Section shown as 21986 
kg., and same goods were cleared under BP-258, dated 
29.12.1993 this BP 2 shows that in case of Export of 
goods the same are cleared on catalogue weight. 
Ans. 5. As per my knowledge in certain exports goods 
we will have to charge them as per catalogue weight 
and there is possibility of (+-) litter difference in the 
weight this is because of international rules." 
11. Apart from the aforequoted positions of the two 
statements, learned counsel for the Revenue could not point 
out any other part of the statements on which he could rely to 
demonstrate any admissions by any of these witnesses. 
12. Once we arrive at an conclusion that there was 
no such admission on the part of these two persons which is 
erroneously read out to be so, entire basis of the impugned 
orders passed by the Commissioner as well as the CESTAT 
gets knocked off. 
13. We would also like to mention at this stage that in 
reply to show cause notice, a specific plea was taken by the 
appellant that the allegations made in the show cause notice 
were purely hypothetical and the difference occurred because 
G of +/-5 per cent tolerance which was admissible in invoicing 
of export dispatches. It was also specifically pleaded that 
the exporter always dispatches 10% less quantity and yet 
the importer pays foreign exchange for full invoice amount, even 
for 10% less quantity received by him. The statements made 
H in the catalogue were also justified in the following manner: -

M/S. MAANALUMINIUM LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 37 
CENTRAL EXCISE, INDORE (A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
"For export of the finished products to various countries, A 
the noticee No. 1 has made out an Export catalogue 
which contains technical details of our different section; 
weight per meter etc. and as per the international 
practice, the invoicing of export dispatches is made 
on the basis of Catalogue weight whereas the actual B 
weightofthe section may be as percatalogueweight 
in most of the cases and in some case it may be 5% 
more or less than the weight as mentioned in the 
catalogue. Each export consignment consist of 
minimum 15-20 different varieties of section/profiles C 
and out of these different types, only in three four 
sections there can be variation and in rest of the sections, 
the weight is almost same. However, the aggregate 
value of the invoice is always as per the actual weight D 
of the total consignment. To elaborate further, if the 
quantity of any particular section is 5% less than the 
catalogue weight, the quantity of other section will be 
5% more than that of catalogue weight. The average 
weight of a container is thus always equal to the E 
actual weight." 
14. It was specifically pointed out that the Department 
had taken only those samples of products with larger quantity 
and missed out those with lesser quantity and in case all the F 
items are taken together, there would not be any difference 
in quantities. This was sought to be demonstrated by a 
chart prepared asAnnexure 'AE' to the show cause notice in · 
the following manner: -
"The chart as Annexure 'AE' prepared for differential G 
quantity 4.044 MT pertaining to the exports made during 
the period from 19.07.93 to 28.06.94 which is totally 
irrelevant as the relevant period of the proposed 
demand duty is from Feb, 94 to Jan, 99. The difference 
worked out in this chart comes to about 4.91 % of total H

38 
A 
B 
c 
D 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2015] 10 S.C.R. 
82.391 MT quantity invoiced which is also appeared 
to be well within the tolerable limit of 5%. Another aspect 
for this chart is that the investigating officers while 
preparing the chart "AE" deliberately have taken only 
those cases in which catalogue weight is more than the 
actual weight and ignored the cases in which actual 
weight were more than the catalogue weight. On going 
through whole para 6, it appears that these were the 
only stray evidences which the investigating officer of 
the department could collect after searching the files 
and records of Noticee No. 1 by spending almost three 
years valuable time of the Central Excise department. 
But these cases are also not relevant in the case of 
Noticee No. 1 as the relevant period of proposed demand 
of duty made in the impugned show cause notice is from 
Feb, 94 to Jan, 99." 
15. It is unfortunate that in spite of the fact that the 
aforesaid plea was specifically raised by the appellant Ki 
explaining that there was no difference in the quantities and 
E thus, no question of any clandestine removal of the goods 
from the premises, the said plea has not been adverted to 
and there is no reference made to the aforesaid material 
produced by the appellant. It is stated at the cost of repetition, 
F that only on the basis of so called admissions made by Mr. 
Mansukhani and Mr. Deepak Das, the authorities jumped 
to the conclusion without undertaking any further exercise. 
Such an order of the CESTATwhich is confirmed by the High 
Court does not stand legal scrutiny and therefore, these orders 
G are liable to be set aside. We, accordingly, allow this appeal 
and quash the demands raised by the authorities. 
16. No costs. 
Kalpana K. Tripathy Appeal allowed. 
H