A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
136 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MARKETING) PRIVATE LIMITED 
v . 
COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, DELHI 
(Civil Appeal No. 2847 of 2010) 
APRIL 24, 2020 
[A. M. KHANWILKAR AND DINESH MAHESHWARI, JJ.] 
Doctrines / Principles – Doctrine of mutuality – Applicabi lity 
of, qua assessee-appellant company (YRMPL), a fully owned 
subsidiary of YRIPL, incorporated for undertaking activities relating 
to Advertising, Marketing and Promotion (AMP activitie s) for and 
on behalf of YRIPL and its franchisees – Assessee was i ncorporated 
by YRIPL as its fully owned subsidiary after approv al from the 
Secretariat for Industrial Assistance (SIA) – Such approval was 
granted subject to conditions, inter alia, to operate on non-profit 
basis on principles of mutuality – After SIA approv al, assessee 
entered into a Tripartite Operating Agreement with Y RIPL and its 
franchisees, wherein assessee received fixed contri butions to the 
extent of 5% of gross sales for proper conduct of a dvertising, 
marketing and promotional activities for mutual benefit of t he parent 
company and the franchisees – For the Assessment Ye ar under 
consideration, assessee filed its returns stating t he income to be 
“Nil” on ground of mutual character of the company – Whether 
assessee-company qualified as a mutual concern in the eyes of law, 
thereby exempting subject transactions from tax lia bility – Held: 
There are three conditions/tests to prove the existence of mutuality 
– First test involves the test of common entity, and cotermi nous with 
it, the requirement of commonality of identity – Th e moment a 
transaction opens itself to non-members, either in the c ontribution 
or the surplus, the uniformity of identity is impai red and the 
transaction assumes the taint of a commercial transaction – On facts, 
the purported mutual concern undertook a commercial venture 
wherein contributions were accepted both from the members as we ll 
as non-members – With the interference of an alien entity , the idea 
of conducting business with oneself was defeated an d any profits 
or gains accruing therefrom became subject to tax liabilit y – Thus, 
doctrine of mutuality stood debunked with the failu re of the first 
test – Nonetheless, the second test of obedience to mandate and the 
[2020] 11 S.C.R. 136 
136

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
137 
third test of impossibility of profits were also co ntravened in the 
factual scenario – The mandate of the assessee company was laid 
down in the SIA approval wherein the twin conditions of mut uality 
and non-profiteering were envisioned as the sine qu a non for 
functioning of assessee company – Contributions mad e by Pepsi 
Foods Ltd. tainted the operations of assessee compa ny with 
commerciality and concomitantly contravened pre-req uisites of 
mutuality and non-profiteering – Third test of mutu ality, which 
requires the purported mutual operations to be mark ed by 
impossibility of profits, also not fulfilled in the pre sent case – One 
member was vested with a myriad set of powers to co ntrol the 
functioning and interests of other members (franchise es), even to 
their detriment – The only entity that could derive any benefi t from 
the surplus funds was YRIPL, i.e. the parent compan y – This is 
antithetical to the third test of mutuality – Appel lant accordingly 
failed to fulfil the stipulations and to prove the existenc e of mutuality 
– It did not operate as a mutual concern – Taxation – Exempti on. 
Doctrines – Doctrine of mutuality – Doctrine of mut uality 
traces its origin from the basic principle that a man cannot eng age 
into a business with himself. 
Words and Phrases – Word “mutual” – Meaning of – Held : 
The word “mutual” points towards reciprocity. 
Taxation – “Mutual concern” – Quintessence for the existence 
of a mutual concern – Discussed – Words and Phrases. 
Interpretation of Statutes – Exemptions – Strict constru ction 
– Exemptions are to be put to strict interpretation. 
Disposing the appeal, the Court 
HELD: 1.1. The doctrine of mutuality traces its origin from 
the basic principle that a man cannot engage into a busine ss with 
himself. For that reason, it is deemed in law that if the identity of 
the seller and the buyer; or the vendor and the consumer; or the 
contributor and the participator is marked by onene ss, then a 
profit motive cannot be attached to such a venture. Thus, for the 
lack of a profit motive, the excess of income over the exp enditure 
or the “surplus” remaining in the hands of such a ventu re cannot 
be regarded as “income” taxable under the Income Tax Act, 1961. 
[Para 14][154-G-H; 155-A] 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
138 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
1.2. The stream of judicial pronouncements expound three 
conditions/tests to prove the existence of mutuality: (i) Identity 
of the contributors to the fund and the recipients fr om the fund; 
(ii) Treatment of the company, though incorporated as a mere 
entity for the convenience of the members and policy h olders, in 
other words, as an instrument obedient to their mandate, and; 
(iii) Impossibility that contributors should derive profits from 
contributions made by themselves to a fund which could on ly be 
expended or returned to themselves. [Para 16][156-C-E]
Common Identity 
2. The first element involves the test of commonali ty of 
identity between the members or participators in th e mutual 
concern and the beneficiaries thereof. Succinctly put, this limb of 
the three-pronged test requires that no person ough t to 
contribute to the common fund without having the entitle ment to 
participate as a beneficiary in the surplus thereof. Conversely, 
no person ought to participate as a beneficiary without first having 
been a contributor or a member of the class of contri butors to 
the common fund. Common identity, as it occurs in the pr esent 
context, signifies that the class of members should stay intact as 
the transaction progresses from the stage of contributions to that 
of returns/surplus. It must manifest uniformity in t he class of 
participants in the transaction. The moment such a trans action 
opens itself to non-members , either in the contribution or the 
surplus, the uniformity of identity is impaired and the tr ansaction 
assumes the taint of a commercial transaction. The emphasis on 
the words member and non-member is of import because the 
doctrine of mutuality does not prohibit the inclusion or exclusion 
of new members. What is prohibited is the infusion of a participant 
in the transaction who does not become a ‘member’ o f the 
common fund, at par with other members, and yet particip ates 
either in the contribution or surplus without subjecti ng itself to 
mutual rights and obligations. The principle of common identity 
prohibits any one-dimensional alteration in the nat ure of 
participation in the mutual fund as the transaction fructi fies. Any 
such alteration would lead to the non-uniform participation of an 
external element or entity in the transaction, there by opening

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
139 
the scope for a manifest or latent profit-based dea ling in the 
transaction with parties outside the closed circuit o f members. It 
would be amenable to income tax as per Section 2(24 ) of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961. [Para 17][156-G; 157-A-E] 
Completeness of Identity 
3.1. Coterminous with the requirement of common identity,
the law also contemplates a completeness of identit y between 
the contributors and participators. The theory of co mpleteness 
of identity presupposes the contributors and participator s to be 
two separate classes, but there is oneness or equal ity in the 
matter of sharing of surplus/profits. This is to ensure that there 
is no interference of any alien commercial entity in the transaction. 
With the interference of any alien entity, the idea of conducting 
business with oneself is defeated and any profits or gains accruing 
therefrom become subject to tax liability. [Para 18][157-F-G]
3.2. In order to determine the breach in mutuality, the court 
is well within its powers to go beyond the periphery of the concern 
and undertake an examination akin to the lifting of t he veil in 
order to discern the real nature thereof. [Para 18][158-C ] 
3.3. In the present case, it is indisputable that Pepsi Foods 
Ltd. is a contributor to the common pool of funds. Howeve r, it 
does not participate in the surplus as a beneficiary for at least 
two reasons- first , Pepsi is not a member of the purported mutual 
concern as the Tripartite Agreement as well as the term s of SIA 
approval permit only ‘franchisees’ to become member s of the 
mutual concern. Notably, Pepsi Foods Ltd. is not a franchisee 
and thus, it cannot participate in the surplus. Second , Pepsi does 
not enjoy any right of participation in the surplus or an y right to 
receive back the surplus which are mandatory ingred ients to 
sustain the principle of mutuality. [Para 19][158-D-E] 
3.4. Further, the Tripartite Agreement requires the
assessee company to constitute a separate Brand Fund fo r each 
franchisee as stated in clause 2.2 of the said agreem ent. Since 
no Brand Fund, as contemplated, has been constituted for Pepsi 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
140 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
Foods Ltd., it does not become a part of the purported Tri partite 
mutual arrangement so as to qualify as a beneficiary of the mutual 
operations. The definition clause of the Tripartite Agreement adds 
weight to this finding. From the definition of “Adv ertising 
Contribution”, and “Franchise Agreements”, in the d efinition 
clause, what follows is that for any amount receive d by the 
assessee company to be treated as an advertising contr ibution, 
it must be paid by a franchisee, that too in the aftermath of a prior 
franchisee agreement to that effect. In the light of the prevailing 
relationship, there is no such franchisee agreement between 
Tricon or TRIM and Pepsi Foods Ltd. and therefore, the amounts 
received from Pepsi Foods Ltd. cannot be viewed as advertising 
contributions “from a member of the mutual undertaking” as such. 
[Para 20][158-F; 159-A, C-D] 
3.5. In the present case, therefore, the assessee com pany 
is realising money both from the members as well as non-members 
in the course of the same activity carried on by it. Such operations 
are antithetical to mutuality. [Para 21][159-E] 
3.6. The contention of the assessee company that Pe psi 
Foods Ltd., in fact, does benefit from the mutual operation s by 
virtue of its exclusive contracts with the franchisees is tenuous, 
as the very basis of mutuality is missing as far as Pepsi Foods 
Ltd. is concerned. Even if any remote or indirect bene fit is being 
reaped by Pepsi Foods Ltd., the same cannot be said to be in lieu 
of it being a member of the purported mutual concer n and 
therefore, cannot be used to fill the missing links in the chain of 
mutuality. Concededly, the surplus of a mutual operation is meant 
to be utilised by the members of the mutual concern as members 
enjoy a proximate connection with the mutual operat ion. Non- 
members, including Pepsi Foods Ltd., stand on a different footi ng 
and have no proximate connection with the affairs of the m utual 
concern. The exclusive contract between the franchi sees and 
Pepsi Foods Ltd. stands on an independent footing and Y RIPL 
as well as the assessee company are not responsible for 
implementation of this contract. Resultantly, the first l imb of the 
three-pronged test stands severed. [Para 22][159-G- H; 
160-A-C]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
141 
Test of Non-profiteering and Obedience to Mandate 
4. The receipt of money from an outside entity with out 
affording it the right to have a share in the surplus d oes not only 
subjugate the first test of common identity, but also con travenes 
the other two conditions for the existence of mutua lity i.e. 
impossibility of profits and obedience to the mandate. The mandate 
of the assessee company was laid down in the SIA ap proval 
wherein the twin conditions of mutuality and non-pr ofiteering 
were envisioned as the sine qua non for the functioning of the 
assessee company. The contributions made by Pepsi Food s Ltd. 
tainted the operations of the assessee company with
commerciality and concomitantly contravened the pre-requisites 
of mutuality and non-profiteering. [Para 23][160-D-E] 
5. The mutuality and non-profiteering character of a 
concern are to be determined in light of its actual working 
structure and the factum of corporation or incorporation or the 
form in which it is clothed is immaterial. It is, t herefore, 
imperative to examine the actual functional framewo rk of the 
assessee company in light of the status of YRIPL (parent company) 
vis-a-vis other members/franchisees. As per the terms of the SIA 
approval, YRIPL and franchisees were equally obligated to make
contribution of a fixed percentage to the assessee company. This 
requirement was incorporated as a pre-condition for the grant of 
permission to operate as a mutual concern. However, drifting 
from this mandate, the Tripartite Agreement made it discretionary 
upon YRIPL to contribute to the common pool, thereby puttin g it 
at a higher pedestal than the franchisees. Furtherm ore, the 
management of the assessee company was under full and absolute 
control of its parent company YRIPL. Also, the participation of 
the franchisees in the management of the assessee compan y was 
again subject to approval by YRIPL, which falls within i ts sole 
discretion. [Para 24][160-F-G; 161-B, D-E] 
6. The net effect of the clauses 4.1 and 7.1 of the Tripart ite 
Agreement is to render the pre-conditions for the g rant of 
approval, as otiose. It also becomes amply clear that YRIPL and
the franchisees stand on two substantially different footings. For, 
the franchisees are obligated to contribute a fixed percentage 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
142 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
for the conduct of AMP activities whereas YRIPL is u nder no 
such obligation in utter violation of the terms of SIA approval. 
Moreover, even upon request for the grant of funds by the 
assessee company, YRIPL is not bound to accede to the req uest 
and enjoys a “sole and absolute” discretion to deci de against 
such request. That members of a financial concern exercise mutual 
control over its management without the scope of pre judicial 
exercise of power by one class of members over the o thers is 
the quintessence for the existence of a mutual concern . The word 
“mutual” offers guidance to this effect. Literally understood, t he 
word “mutual” points towards reciprocity and a mutual 
arrangement is one in which the members/parties have recipr ocal 
rights or understanding or arrangement. An arrangement wherein 
one member is subjected to the absolute discretion o f another, 
in such a manner that the entire liability may fall upon one whereas 
benefits are reaped by all, is antithesis to the mutual character in 
the eyes of law. [Para 25][162-B-E] 
7. The contention advanced by the appellant that it is not
mandatory for every member of the mutual concern to contribute 
to the common pool fails to advance the case of the appellant. It 
is no doubt true that every member of the mutual concern might 
not be required to contribute to the common pool at all times. 
However, it does not mean that one member cannot be made to 
contribute under any pretext whatsoever. For, that would amount 
to the grant of an overriding position to a member in the mutual 
agreement, extending upto even overruling the reque sts for 
contribution from other members for mutual necessity. It is this 
all-pervasive overriding position of one member over the others 
that negates the effect of mutuality. There is a fine line of distinction 
between absence of obligation and presence of overr iding 
discretion. In the present case, YRIPL enjoys the la tter at the 
detriment of the franchisees of the purported undertaki ng, both 
in matters of contribution and management. In a mutual conce rn, 
it is no doubt true that an obligation to pay may or may not be 
there, but in the same breath, it is equally true that an overriding 
discretion of one member over others cannot be sust ained, in 
order to preserve the real essence of mutuality where in members 
contribute for the mutual benefit of all and not of one at the cost 
of others. [Para 26][162-F-H; 163-A]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
143 
8. More importantly, in order to qualify as a mutual concern, 
the contributors to the common fund either acquire a r ight to 
participate in the surplus or an entitlement to get back the 
remaining proportion of their respective contributions. Con trary 
to the abovestated legal position, clause 8.4 of th e Tripartite 
Agreement makes it clear that the franchisees do not enj oy any 
“entitlement” or “right” on the surplus remaining a fter the 
operations have been carried out for a given assessm ent year. 
The clause provides that the assessee company may re fund the 
surplus subject to the approval of its Board of Directors. It implies 
that the franchisees/contributors cannot claim a refund of their 
remaining amount as a matter of right. The raison d’etre behind 
the refund of surplus to the contributors or mandatory utili sation 
of the same in the subsequent assessment year is to red uce their 
burden of contribution in the next year proportiona te to the 
surplus remaining from the previous year. Thus, the fulfi lment of 
this condition becomes essential. In the present ca se, even if 
any surplus is remaining in a given assessment year, it i s unlikely 
to reduce the liability of the franchisees in the foll owing year as 
their liability to the extent of 5 percent is fixed and non-negotiable, 
irrespective of whether any funds are surplus in th e previous 
year. The only entity that could derive any benefit from the surplus 
funds is YRIPL, i.e. the parent company. This is anti thetical to 
the third test of mutuality. [Paras 27, 28][163-B, E-H] 
9. Be that as it may, the dispensation predicated i n the 
Tripartite Agreement may entail in a situation where YRIPL would 
not contribute even a single penny to the common pool and yet 
be able to derive profits in the form of royalties out of the 
purported mutual operations, created from the fixed 5 per ce nt 
contribution made by the franchisees. This would be nothing short 
of derivation of gains/profits out of inputs supplie d by others. 
That cannot be countenanced as being violative of t he basic 
essence of mutuality. The doctrine of mutuality, in principle, 
entails that there should not be any profit earning moti ve, either 
directly or indirectly. The third test of mutuality requ ires that the 
purported mutual operations must be marked by an impossibil ity 
of profits and this crucial test is also not fulfilled in the present 
case. [Para 29][164-A-C] 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
144 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
10. Furthermore, the exemption granted to a mutual concern 
is premised on the assumption that the concern is bein g run for 
the mutual benefit of the contributors and the contributions made 
by the members ought to be directed in that direction. Contrary 
to this fundamental tenet, clause 8.1 of the Tripartite Ag reement 
relieves the assessee company from any specific obl igation of 
spending the amounts received by way of contributions f or the 
benefit of the contributors. It explicates that the assessee 
company does not hold such amount under any implied trust for 
the franchisees. [Para 30][164-D] 
11. A priori, it must follow that the assessee company had 
acted in contravention of the terms of approval. Notably, the SIA 
approval or Government approval was not only a bind ing 
document but also a conditional document with a defined se t of 
preconditions for the functioning of the assessee com pany as a 
mutual concern. The SIA approval categorically reads t hat the 
grant of approval is subject to the terms and conditions spe cified 
therein and any contravention thereof would be infraction of the 
mandate of the government approval. [Para 31][164-G] 
12. The appellant had urged that no fixed percentage of 
contribution could be imputed upon YRIPL as it does not ope rate 
any restaurant directly and thus, the actual volume of sales cannot 
be determined. At the very outset, this argument holds no water 
as YRIPL receives fixed percentage of royalty from the 
franchisees on the sales. This is so because if the franchisees 
could be obligated with a fixed percentage of contr ibution, 5 
percent in the present case, it is unfathomable as to wh y the same 
obligation ought not to apply to YRIPL. [Para 32][1 64-H; 
165-A-B] 
13. The text of the Tripartite Agreement points towa rds 
the true intent of the formation of the assessee com pany as a 
step down subsidiary. In the absence of any ambiguity, th e terms 
of a contract are to be understood in their ordinary and natu ral 
sense, thus revealing the true intent of the contrac ting parties. 
Clause C clearly points towards the fact that the assessee company 
was formed to manage business on behalf of the holding company. 
In its true form, it was not contemplated as a non- business

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
145 
concern because operations integral to the function ing of a 
business were entrusted to it. [Para 33][165-B, D-E] 
14. The doctrine of mutuality bestows a special stat us to 
qualify for exemption from tax liability. It is a settled proposition 
of law that exemptions are to be put to strict interpr etation. The 
appellant having failed to fulfil the stipulations and to prove the 
existence of mutuality, the question of extending exempt ion from 
tax liability to the appellant, that too at the cos t of public 
exchequer, does not arise. Taking any other view would ent ail in 
stretching the limits of construction. [Para 34][165-F] 
15. The assessee company has tried to establish a parallel 
between the operations carried out by itself and clubs. However, 
there are structural differences between the operat ions carried 
out by the purported mutual concern (assessee compan y) and 
clubs. In the case of clubs, the operations are exemp ted from 
taxability because of the underlying notion that they oper ate for 
the common benefit of the members wishing to enter into a social 
exchange with no commercial intent. Further, all the mem bers of 
the club not only have a common identity in the concern bu t also 
stand on an equal footing in terms of their rights and li abilities 
towards the club or the mutual undertaking. Such clu bs are a 
means of social intercourse, and are not formed for the facilitation 
of any commercial activity. On the contrary, the purported mutual 
concern in the present case undertakes a commercial venture 
wherein contributions are accepted both from the memb ers as 
well as non-members. Moreover, one member is vested with a 
myriad set of powers to control the functioning and interes ts of 
other members (franchisees), even to their detriment. Such an 
assimilation cannot be termed as a case of ordinary social 
intercourse devoid of commerciality. [Para 35][166-D-G] 
16. Once it is conclusively determined that the ass essee 
company had not operated as a mutual concern, there wou ld be 
no question of extending exemption from tax liability. Be t hat as 
it may, to support an alternative claim for exemption, the assessee 
company took a plea in the written submissions that it was acting 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
146 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
under a Trust for the contributors, and was under an overri ding 
obligation to spend the amounts received for advert ising, 
marketing and promotional activities. It was urged that once the 
incoming amount is earmarked for an obligation, it does not 
become “income” in the hands of the assessee as no occasion 
for the application of such income arises. [Para 36]167-A-C]
17. Considering the fact that the question of diversio n by 
overriding title was neither framed nor agitated in th e appeal 
memo before the High Court or before this Court (except a brief 
mention in the written submissions), coupled with the fact that 
neither the Tribunal nor the High Court has dealt with that plea 
and that the rectification application raising that ground is still 
undecided and stated to be pending before the Tribunal , it is left 
open to the appellant to pursue the rectification applicat ion, if so 
advised. [Paras 38, 41][169-C-D] 
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bihar v. Bankipur Club 
Ltd. (1997) 5 SCC 394 : [1997] 1 Suppl. SCR 263; 
Bangalore Club v. Commissioner of Income Tax & Anr. 
(2013) 5 SCC 509 : [2013] 1 SCR 267; Commissioner 
of Income Tax, Bombay City v. Royal Western India Turf 
Club Ltd, AIR 1954 SC 85 : [1954] SCR 289 – relied 
on. 
Dalmia Cement Ltd., Rajasthan v. Commissioner of 
Income Tax, New Delhi (1999) 4 SCC 124 : [1999] 2 
SCR 735; The Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay 
City II v. Sitaldas Tirathdas AIR 1961 SC 728 : [1961] 
SCR 634; Associated Power Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner 
of Income Tax (1996) 7 SCC 221 : [1995] 5 Suppl. 
SCR 721; The Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala, 
Ernakulam v. The Travancore Sugars & Chemical Ltd. 
(1973) 3 SCC 274 : [1973] 2 SCR 738- referred to. 
The English and Scottish Joint Co-operative Wholesale 
Society Ltd. v. Commissioner of Agricultural Income- 
Tax, Assam AIR 1948 PC 142 –referred to. 
New York Life Insurance Co. v. Styles (Surveyor of 
Taxes) (1889) 2 TC 460 – referred to.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
147 
Simon’s Taxes , Volume B, 3 rd Edition, Pgs. 159, 167; 
British Tax Encyclopedia (I) , 1962 Edition, Pgs. 1200 
and 1201 and Thomas M. Cooley, The Law of Taxation, 
4th Edition, Volume 2, Pg. 671 – referred to. 
Case Law Reference 
[1997] 1 Suppl. SCR 263 relied on Para 14 
[2013] 1 SCR 267 relied on Para 15 
[1954] SCR 289 relied on Para 16 
[1999] 2 SCR 735 referred to Para 38 
[1961] SCR 634 referred to Para 38 
[1995] 5 Suppl. SCR 721 referred to Para 13 
[1973] 2 SCR 738 referred to Para 22 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal No. 2847 
of 2010. 
From the Judgment and Order dated 01.04.2009 of the High Court 
of Delhi at New Delhi in I. T. Appeal No. 1433 of 2008. 
Balbir Singh, Sr. Adv., Ms. Anuradha Dutt, Ms. Fereshte D. Sethna, 
Tushar Jarwal, Rahul Sateeja, Ms. B. Vijayalakshmi Menon and Deepak 
Thakur, Adv. for the Appellant. 
V . Shekhar, Sr. Adv., Ms. Praveen Gautam, Shashank Shekhar 
and Ms. Sheetal Rajput, Advs. for the Respondent. 
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 
A. M. KHANWILKAR, J. 
1. The moot question involved in the present appeal bears upon 
the applicability of the doctrine of mutuality qua the assessee company, 
a fully owned subsidiary of Yum! Restaurants (India) Pvt. Ltd. (for short, 
“YRIPL”), formerly known as Tricon Restaurants Indi a Pvt. Ltd., 
incorporated for undertaking the activities relating to Advertising, 
Marketing and Promotion (for short, “AMP activities”) for and on behalf 
of YRIPL and its franchisees. 
2. This appeal assails the final judgment and order dated 1.4.2009 
passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi (for short , “the High 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
148 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
Court”) in I.T.A. No. 1433 of 2008 wherein the question of taxability of 
Rs. 44,44,002/- (Rupees forty four lakhs forty four thousand two only), 
being the excess of income over expenditure for the Assessm ent Year 
2001-02, was settled in favour of the Revenue and against the assessee, 
thereby confirming the orders of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (for 
short, “the Tribunal”), Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) [for short, 
the “CIT(A)”] and the Assessing Officer. The preceding forums, without 
any exception, have returned consistent verdicts refusing to acknowledge 
the assessee company as a mutual concern and denying any exemption 
from taxability. 
3. The appellant company Yum! Restaurants (Marketing) Private 
Limited (for short, “YRMPL” or “assessee company” or “ass essee”) 
was incorporated by YRIPL as its fully owned subsidiary af ter having 
obtained approval from the Secretariat for Industrial Assi stance (for 
short “SIA”) for the purpose of economisation of the cost of advertising 
and promotion of the franchisees as per their needs. The approval was 
granted subject to certain conditions as regards the functioning of 
assessee, whereby it was obligated to operate on a non-p rofit basis on 
the principles of mutuality. The relevant clauses of the approval granted 
by the SIA for the aforementioned operations read thus: 
“3. It is noted that the broad framework within whic h such 
subsidiary shall be managed and operated in India is as follows: 
- The franchises and Tricon India will both make contribution 
of a fixed percentage of their respective revenues (net of taxes) 
to the proposed New Company on regular basis; 
- The proposed New Company would be a non-profit enterprise 
governed by the principles of mutuality. No part of the 
contributions or other income shall enure to the benefit of any 
individual contributor; 
- The contributors will be optimally used by the proposed new 
Company to economise the cost of advertising and promotion 
cater to the specific needs of franchisees to concentrate on 
restaurant operations and management; 
- The management of the proposed New Company shall vest 
with Tricon India and application of contributions will be decided 
by Tricon India in consultation with the franchisee; 
xxx xxx xxx

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
149 
-The approval is subject to the condition that the ste p down 
subsidiary would be a non-profit enterprise and would not be 
allowed to repatriate dividends.” 
4. In furtherance of the approval, the assessee entered into a 
Tripartite Operating Agreement (for short, the “Tripartite Agreement”) 
with YRIPL and its franchisees, wherein the assessee company received 
fixed contributions to the extent of 5 per cent of gross sales for the 
proper conduct of the advertising, marketing and promotional activities 
for the mutual benefit of the parent company and the franchis ees. The 
terms of the Tripartite Agreement, to the extent re levant for the 
consideration of the present case, are produced thus: 
“2.2 TRIM will establish and operate Brand Funds in respect of
each Brand for the purpose of allocating and using the Advertising 
Contribution received from franchisee and other franchisee of 
Tricon operating Restaurants under the Brands. TRIM will allocate 
the advertising contribution received from the Franchisees including 
Franchisee for each Restaurant to the respective Brand funds 
established for that brand. It is agreed between the Parties that 
the advertising contribution paid into a brand fund will be used for 
the AMP Activities relating to that brand. 
3. FRANCHISEE ADVERTISING CONTRIBUTIONS 
3.1 As and from the Effect Date, Franchisee will pay the 
Advertising Contribution of 5% of Revenues for a particular month 
into the Bank account of the Brand Fund established by TRIM by 
the 10th day of the following month. Details of the bank account, 
of each Brand Fund set up by TRIM will notified to Franchisee 
by TRIM from time to time. Notwithstanding the aforesaid, t he 
executive committee of any Brand (constituted under Article 7 of 
this Agreement) may, by a three fourth majority, which shall be 
binding on all franchisees of Tricon including the Franchisee , 
require the franchisee to pay the advertising Contribution in 
advance. For the avoidance of doubt it is clarified and agreed that 
while recommending advance payment of Advertising Contribution 
the chairman will not have a casting vote. 
Franchise will spend an additional 1% of Revenues, in the manner 
directed by Tricon and/or TRIM in writing from time to time, on 
such local store marketing, advertising, promotional and research 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
150 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
expenditure proposed by Franchisee and approved in advance by 
Tricon and/or TRIM during the relevant Accounting Period, in 
accordance with the requirements and guidelines set out in the 
Manuals, provided that if Franchisee fails to spend the full amount 
as directed by Tricon and/or TRIM franchisee will pay the unspent 
amount to TRIM within the period specified in a written demand 
from TRIM. Upon receipt of the unspent amount TRIM will spend 
the amount on regional and/or national advertising, promotions or 
research expenditure conducted by TRIM in its discretion.......” 
xxx xxx xxx 
4.1 Tricon may at the request of TRIM, but subject to 
Tricon’s sole and absolute discretion pay to TRIM any such 
amount(s) as it may deem appropriate to support the AMP 
[sic ]activities during any Accounting Period for the 
avoidance of doubt, it is clarified and agreed between the
Parties that Tricon shall have no obligation to pay any such 
amounts if it chooses not to do so. 
xxx xxx xxx 
8.4 In the event there is any surplus left over in any of the Brand 
Funds at the end of an accounting period, TRIM shall be entitled 
to retain the surplus to be spent on AMP activities during the 
following accounting period. Alternatively, TRIM may, subject to 
the approval of its Board of Directors refund the surplus amounts 
to the franchisees including Franchisee in the same proportion as 
the actual advertising contribution made by each franc hisee 
including franchisee in that accounting period. 
On the other hand, if there is a deficit in any of the brand funds at 
the end of an accounting period, the deficit will be carried forward 
to the next accounting period and be met out of the adverti sing 
contribution paid by the franchisees including franchisee for that 
accounting period. For the avoidance of doubt, it is agreed between 
the parties that Tricon and/or TRIM shall not be obliged to fund 
the deficit. 
8.5 It is clearly understood and agreed between the parties that 
the only objective of TRIM is to coordinate the marketing activities 
of the brands including the mutual benefit of the franchi sees

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
151 
including the Franchisee. It is envisaged that no profits wil l be 
earned and no dividends will be declared by TRIM.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
5. For the Assessment Year under consideration, the assesse e 
filed its returns stating the income to be “Nil” under the p retext of the 
mutual character of the company. The same was not accepted by the 
Assessing Officer, who observed thus: 
“VI.7.3 As per the SIA letter dated 05.10.1998 Assessee Company 
along with the franchisees were to contribute a fix percentage of 
its revenue to YRMPL. However as per clause 4.1 of Tripart ite 
operating agreement submitted by YRMPL, the assessee company 
had its sole absolute discretion to pay to YRMPL any amount as 
it may deem appropriate and that YRIPL shall have no obligation 
to pay any such amounts if it chooses not to do so. This clear ly 
shows that YRIPL was under no legal obligation to pay any amount 
of contribution as per its own version reflected from tripar tite 
agreement.” 
6. The imposition of liability by the Assessing Officer was upheld 
by the C.I.T. (A) on the ground of taint of commerciality in the activities 
undertaken by the assessee company, wherein it was observed thus: 
“1.14 ....The AMP activity is quite a critical component of running 
a successful business venture, it is intrinsically linked to sales and 
profit of the franchisees the contributors. Accordingly it c annot 
be said that such activity is immune from the taint of commerciality. 
Unlike in the cases of a club, the appellant Co. is not existing for 
any social inter course nor is it for cultural activitie s where the 
idea of profit or trade does not exist. What is essential is that 
there should not be any dealing with outside body which results in 
a benefit which promotes some commercial/business venture. 
There should not be any profit earning motive in any transaction 
directly or indirectly. In fact in the appellant’s case the essence of 
mutuality also appears to be missing in that there is no instance or 
scope of say trading between persons associating together. Thus 
though the form taken up to conduct its revenue act ivity 
undoubtedly resemble a mutual concern but the contributions made 
on the other hand are undeniably for business considerations. In 
my opinion, taking an overall view of the intent and motive of the 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
152 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
appellant company to form a ‘mutual concern’ it can be concluded 
that the underlying purpose was solely for commerci al 
consideration. Therefore in view of the above as demonstrated 
by the appellant Co. the excess of receipts over the expendit ure 
i.e. the surplus in my opinion would be income liable to tax….” 
7. The liability was further confirmed by the Tribunal, wherein the 
essential ingredients of the doctrine of mutuality were found to be missing. 
It observed thus: 
“11. .... Firstly the Government order sanctioning setting up of the 
wholly owned subsidiary prescribes that the approval is subject to 
the condition that such subsidiary would be a non-profit enterprise 
and is also not entitled to repatriate dividends. The main object of 
the assessee company reveals that it is to carry out advert ising, 
marketing and promotion for brands owned by its parent company. 
The main plank of the assessee’s arguments is that the principles 
of mutuality will apply and hence the income cannot be taxed. 
Time and again various courts have held that where there is 
complete identity between the contributors and the participators 
or the beneficiaries, only then such principles can be appl ied. 
However, in the present case it is seen that apart from 
contributions is also received from M/s Pepsi Foods Lt d. 
and YRIPL. Pepsi Foods Ltd. is neither a franchisee nor a
beneficiary. Similarly some contribution is also received 
from YRIPL which YRIPL is not under any obligation to
pay. Thus it can be said that essential requirement that of 
the contributors to the common fund are either to participate 
in the surplus or they are beneficiaries of the contri bution 
is missing. Through the common AMP activities no benefit 
accrues to Pepsi Food Ltd. or YRIPL. Accordingly the 
principles of mutuality cannot be applied. It is a different 
facts that the assessee was established with the object not to 
make profit but it is also a fact that there is a surplus in the hands 
of the assessee which arose due to contribution from cer tain 
persons who were neither the benficiaries nor have right to receive 
the surplus....” 
(emphasis supplied) 
8. The consistent line of opinion recorded by the aforementioned 
three forums was further approved in appeal by the High Court v ide 
impugned judgment, by observing thus:

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
153 
“8. ....The principle of mutuality as enunciated by the Courts i n 
various cases is applicable to a situation where the income of the 
mutual concern is the contributions received from its contributors. 
The expenses incurred by the mutual concerns are incurred from 
such contributions and hence on the principle that no man can do 
business with himself, the excess of income over expenditure is 
not amenable to tax. However, in the present case the authorities 
below have returned a finding of fact that the fund as contributors 
such as Pepsi Food Ltd which do not benefit from the APM 
Activities. Moreover, the principle of mutuality is appl icable to 
those entities whose activities are not tinged with commerc ial 
purpose. As a matter of fact in the instant case the parent company 
i.e., YRIPL which has also contributed to the brand fund is under
the agreement under no obligation to do so. The contributions of
YRIPL are at its own discretion. Thus, looking at the facts obtaining 
in the present case, it is quite clear that the principle of mutuality 
would not be applicable to the instant case....” 
9. On cogitating over the rival submissions, we reckon that the 
following questions of law would arise for our consideration in the present 
case: 
(i) Whether the assessee company would qualify as a mu tual 
concern in the eyes of law, thereby exempting subject transactions 
from tax liability? 
(ii) Whether the excess of income over expenditure in the hands 
of the assessee company is not taxable? 
10. The appellant/assessee has contended that the sole objective 
of the assessee company was to carry on the earmarked activit ies on a 
no-profit basis and to operate strictly for the benefit of the contributors 
to the mutual concern. It has further been contended that the assessee 
company levies no charge on the franchisees for carryi ng out the 
operations. While assailing the observations made in the im pugned 
judgment, holding that Pepsi Foods Ltd. and YRIPL are not beneficiaries 
of the concern, the assessee company has urged that YRIPL is the 
parent company of the assessee and earns fixed percentage from the 
franchisees by way of royalty. Therefore, it benefit s directly from 
enhanced sales as increased sales would translate into increased royalties. 
A similar argument has been advanced as regards Pepsi Foods Ltd. It is 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
154 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
stated that under a marketing agreement, the franchisees are bound to 
serve Pepsi drinks at their outlets and thus, an increase in the sales at 
KFC and Pizza Hut outlets as a result of AMP activities would lead to a 
corresponding increase in the sales of Pepsi. To add weight to this 
argument, it has been brought to our notice that Pepsi was also advertised 
by the franchisees in their advertising and promotional material, along 
with Pizza Hut and KFC, and copy of the said material has been placed 
on record. 
11. As regards the doctrine of mutuality, it is urged by the assessee 
company that the doctrine merely requires an identity be tween the 
contributors and beneficiaries and it does not contemplate that each 
member should contribute to the common fund or that the benefits must 
be derived by the beneficiaries in the same manner or to the same extent. 
Reliance has been placed by the appellant upon reported d ecisions to 
draw a parallel between the functioning of the assessee compa ny and 
clubs to support the presence of mutuality. 
12. The Revenue/respondent has countered the submissions made 
by the assessee company by submitting that the moment a non-member 
joins the common pool of funds created for the benefit of the contributors, 
the taint of commerciality begins and mutuality ceases to exist in the 
eyes of law. It has been submitted that the assessee company o perated 
in contravention of the SIA approval as contributions were receive d 
from Pepsi, despite it not being a member of the brand fund. To buttress 
this submission, it is urged that once the basic purpose of benefiting the 
actual contributors is lost, mutuality stands wiped out. 
13. We have heard Mr. Balbir Singh, learned senior counsel for 
the appellant and Mr. V. Shekhar, learned senior co unsel for the 
respondent. 
Re: Question (i): 
14. The doctrine of mutuality traces its origin from the basi c 
principle that a man cannot engage into a business with himself. For that 
reason, it is deemed in law that if the identity of the seller and the buyer; 
or the vendor and the consumer; or the contributor and the participator 
is marked by oneness, then a profit motive cannot be attached to such a 
venture. Thus, for the lack of a profit motive, the excess of income over 
the expenditure or the “surplus” remaining in the hands of such a venture 
cannot be regarded as “income” taxable under the Income Tax A ct,

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
155 
1961 (for short, “the 1961 Act”). What is taxable under the 1961 Act is 
“income” or “profits” or “gains” as they accrue to a person in his dealings 
with other party or parties that do not share the same identity w ith the 
assessee. For income, there is an underlying exchange of a commercial 
nature between two different entities. In Commissioner of Income Tax, 
Bihar v. Bankipur Club Ltd. 1, this court observed on the nature of 
liability under the 1961 Act thus: 
“6. Under the Income Tax Act (hereinafter referred to as “the
Act”) what is taxed is, the “income, profits or gains earned or 
“arising”, “accruing” to a person”. The question is whether in the 
case of members’ clubs - a species of mutual undertaking - in 
rendering various services to its members which result in a surplus, 
the club can be said to “have earned income or profits” In order 
to answer the question, it is necessary to have a background of
the law relating to “mutual trading” or “mutual undertaking” and 
a “members club”.” 
15. The law regarding the tenets of mutuality is no more res 
integra . It has been settled in a catena of judicial pronouncements and
academic works across multiple jurisdictions. In Bangalore Club v. 
Commissioner of Income Tax& Anr. 2, this Court authoritatively quoted 
one of the earliest judicial pronouncements in New York Life Insurance 
Co. v. Styles (Surveyor of Taxes) 3 thus: 
“When a number of individuals agree to contribute funds for a
common purpose. . . and stipulate that their contributions, so far 
as not required for that purpose, shall be repaid to them. I cannot 
conceive why they should be regarded as traders, or why 
contributions returned to them should be regarded as profits.” 
The proposition of law is restated in Bankipur Club (supra) and 
Bangalore Club (supra) by placing reliance upon the following extract 
from Simon’ s Taxes 4:
“…it is settled law that if the persons carrying on a trade do so in 
such a way that they and the customers are the same persons ,
no profits or gains are yielded by the trade for tax purposes and 
1 (1997) 5 SCC 394 
2 (2013) 5 SCC 509 
3 (1889) 2 TC 460 
4 Simon’s Taxes, V olume B, 3rd Edition, Pgs. 159, 167 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
156 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
therefore no assessment in respect of the trade can be made. 
Any surplus resulting from this form of trading represents only 
the extent to which the contributions of the participators have 
proved to be in excess of requirements. Such a surplus is regarded 
as their own money and returnable to them. In order that this
exempting element of mutuality should exist it is essential that the 
profits should be capable of coming back at some time and in
some form to the persons to whom the goods were sold or the 
services rendered...” 
16. In order to undertake the examination of mutuality, we gainfully 
advert to The English and Scottish Joint Co-operative Wholesale
Society Ltd. v. Commissioner of Agricultural Income-Tax , Assam 5,
which has been quoted with approval by this Court in Commissioner of 
Income Tax, Bombay City v. Royal Western India Turf Clu b Ltd. 6
and Bangalore Club (supra) . The aforestated stream of judicial 
pronouncements expound three conditions/tests to prove the existence 
of mutuality: 
(i) Identity of the contributors to the fund and the recipients from 
the fund; 
(ii) Treatment of the company, though incorporated as a mere
entity for the convenience of the members and policy holders, in 
other words, as an instrument obedient to their mandate, and; 
(iii) Impossibility that contributors should derive profits from 
contributions made by themselves to a fund which could only be
expended or returned to themselves. 
Whereas the legal position on what amounts to a mutual concern 
stands fairly settled, the factual determination of the same on a case to 
case basis poses a complex issue that requires deeper examination. Such 
examination ought to be conducted in the light of the tests enunci ated 
above. 
Common Identity 
17. The first element involves the test of commonality of identity 
between the members or participators in the mutual conce rn and the 
beneficiaries thereof. Succinctly put, this limb of the three-pronged test 
5 AIR 1948 PC 142 
6 AIR 1954 SC 85

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
157 
requires that no person ought to contribute to the common fund without 
having the entitlement to participate as a beneficiary in the surplus 
thereof. Conversely, no person ought to participate as a beneficiary without 
first having been a contributor or a member of the class of contributors 
to the common fund. Common identity, as it occurs in the present context, 
signifies that the class of members should stay intact as the transaction 
progresses from the stage of contributions to that of returns/surplus. It 
must manifest uniformity in the class of participants in the transaction. 
The moment such a transaction opens itself to non-members , either in 
the contribution or the surplus, the uniformity of identity is impaired and 
the transaction assumes the taint of a commercial tran saction. The 
emphasis on the words member and non-member is of import because 
the doctrine of mutuality does not prohibit the inclusion or exclusion of 
new members. What is prohibited is the infusion of a participant in the 
transaction who does not become a ‘member’ of the common fund, at
par with other members, and yet participates either in the contribution or 
surplus without subjecting itself to mutual rights and ob ligations. The 
principle of common identity prohibits any one-dimensional alteration in 
the nature of participation in the mutual fund as the transaction fructifies. 
Any such alteration would lead to the non-uniform participat ion of an 
external element or entity in the transaction, thereby opening the scope 
for a manifest or latent profit-based dealing in the transaction with parties 
outside the closed circuit of members. It would be amenable to income 
tax as per Section 2(24) of the 1961 Act. 
Completeness of Identity 
18. Coterminous with the requirement of common identity, as 
discussed above, the law also contemplates a completeness of ident ity 
between the contributors and participators. The theory of completeness 
of identity presupposes the contributors and participat ors to be two 
separate classes, but there is oneness or equality in the matter of sharing 
of surplus/profits. This is to ensure that there is no interferenc e of any 
alien commercial entity in the transaction. With the interference of any 
alien entity, the idea of conducting business with oneself is defeated and 
any profits or gains accruing therefrom become subject to tax liability. 
This proposition of law is succinctly predicated in British Tax 
Encyclopaedia 7, which reads thus: 
7 British Tax Encyclopedia (I), 1962 Edition, Pgs. 1 200 and 1201 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
158 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
“…For this doctrine to apply it is essential that all the contributors 
to the common fund are entitled to participate in the surplus and 
that all the participators in the surplus are contributors, so that 
there is complete identity between contributors and
participators . This means identity as a class, so that at any given 
moment of time the persons who are contributing are identica l 
with the persons entitled to participate; it does not matter that the 
class may be diminished by persons going out of the scheme or
increased by others coming in” 
It is pertinent to note that in order to determine the breach in 
mutuality, the court is well within its powers to go beyond the periphery 
of the concern and undertake an examination akin to the lifti ng of the 
veil in order to discern the real nature thereof. 
19. In the present case, it is indisputable that Pepsi Foods Ltd. is 
a contributor to the common pool of funds. However, it does not 
participate in the surplus as a beneficiary for at least two reasons- first ,
Pepsi is not a member of the purported mutual concern as the Tripartite 
Agreement as well as the terms of SIA approval permit only ‘franchisees’ 
to become members of the mutual concern. Notably, Pepsi Foods Ltd. is 
not a franchisee and thus, it cannot participate in the surpl us. Second ,
Pepsi does not enjoy any right of participation in the surplus or any right 
to receive back the surplus which are mandatory ingredients to sustain 
the principle of mutuality. 
20. We find it noteworthy that the Tripartite Agreement requires 
the assessee company to constitute a separate Brand Fun d for each 
franchisee as stated in clause 2.2 of the said agreement, which reads 
thus: 
“2.2 TRIM will establish and operate Brand Funds in respect of 
each Brand , for the purpose of allocating and using the Advertising 
Contribution received from franchisee and other franchisee of 
Tricon operating Restaurants under the Brands TRIM will allocate 
the advertising contribution received from the franchisees including 
Franchisee for each Restaurant to the Parties that the Advertising 
Contribution paid into a Brand Fund will be used for the AMP 
Activities relating to that Brand.” 
(emphasis supplied)

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
159 
Since no Brand Fund, as contemplated above, has been constituted 
for Pepsi Foods Ltd., it does not become a part of the purported Tripartite 
mutual arrangement so as to qualify as a beneficiary of the mutual 
operations. The definition clause of the Tripartite Agreement adds weight 
to this finding. “Advertising Contribution”, as defined in the definition 
clause means, 
“the advertising contributions which Franchisee has agreed to pay 
to Tricon pursuant to [ sic ] the Franchisee Agreements.” 
Furthermore, “Franchise Agreements”, as defined in the definition 
clause, means agreements executed between Tricon and Franchisee . 
As a corollary, what follows is that for any amount receive d by the 
assessee company to be treated as an advertising contributio n, it must 
be paid by a franchisee, that too in the aftermath of a p rior franchisee 
agreement to that effect. In the light of the prevailing relationship, there 
is no such franchisee agreement between Tricon or TRIM and P epsi 
Foods Ltd. and therefore, the amounts received from Pepsi Foods Ltd. 
cannot be viewed as advertising contributions “from a memb er of the 
mutual undertaking” as such. 
21. In the present case, therefore, the assessee company is realising 
money both from the members as well as non-members in the course of 
the same activity carried on by it. This court, in Royal Western India 
Turf Club Ltd. (supra) has categorically held such operations to be 
antithetical to mutuality. We deem it apposite to take note of the dictum 
in Bankipur Club (supra), wherein this principle has been restated thus:
“22. ...if the object of the assessee company claiming to be a 
“mutual concern” or “club”, is to carry on a particular busi ness 
and the money is realised both from the members and from non- 
members, for the same consideration by giving the same or similar 
facilities to all alike in respect of the one and the same busi ness 
carried on by it, the dealings as a whole disclose the same profit- 
earning motive and are alike tainted with commerciality...and the 
resultant surplus is profit-income liable to tax…” 
22. The contention of the assessee company that Pepsi Foods 
Ltd., in fact, does benefit from the mutual operations by virt ue of its 
exclusive contracts with the franchisees is tenuous, as the very basis of 
mutuality is missing as far as Pepsi Foods Ltd. is concerned, as discussed 
hitherto. Even if any remote or indirect benefit is being reaped by Pepsi 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
160 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
Foods Ltd., the same cannot be said to be in lieu of it being a member of 
the purported mutual concern and therefore, cannot be used to f ill the 
missing links in the chain of mutuality. Concededly, the surplus of a mutual 
operation is meant to be utilised by the members of the mutual concern 
as members enjoy a proximate connection with the mutual o peration. 
Non-members, including Pepsi Foods Ltd., stand on a different footing 
and have no proximate connection with the affairs of the mutual concern. 
The exclusive contract between the franchisees and Pepsi Foods Ltd. 
stands on an independent footing and YRIPL as well as the ass essee 
company are not responsible for implementation of t his contract. 
Resultantly, the first limb of the three-pronged test stands severed. 
Non-profiteering and Obedience to Mandate 
23. Whereas the doctrine of mutuality stands debunked with the 
failure of the first test, let us, nonetheless, examine the other two tests in 
the present factual scenario. Indubitably, the receipt of money from an 
outside entity without affording it the right to have a share in the surplus 
does not only subjugate the first test of common identi ty, but also 
contravenes the other two conditions for the existence of mutuality i.e. 
impossibility of profits and obedience to the mandate. The mandate of 
the assessee company was laid down in the SIA approval wher ein the 
twin conditions of mutuality and non-profiteering were envisioned as the 
sine qua non for the functioning of the assessee company. The 
contributions made by Pepsi Foods Ltd. tainted the operations of the 
assessee company with commerciality and concomitantly contravened 
the pre-requisites of mutuality and non-profiteering. 
24. The mutuality and non-profiteering character of a concern
are to be determined in light of its actual working struct ure and the 
factum of corporation or incorporation or the form in which it is clothed 
is immaterial. It is, therefore, imperative to examine the actual functional 
framework of the assessee company in light of the status of YR IPL 
(parent company) vis-a-vis other members/franchisees. As per the terms 
of the SIA approval, YRIPL and franchisees were equally obligated to
make contribution of a fixed percentage to the assessee company. This 
requirement was incorporated as a pre-condition for the grant of 
permission to operate as a mutual concern. Clause 3 of the ap proval 
letter reads thus:

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
161 
“The franchises and Tricon Indian will both make contribution of 
a fixed percentage of their respective revenues (net of taxes) to 
the proposed New Company on regular basis:” 
However, drifting from this mandate, the Tripartite Agreement 
made it discretionary upon YRIPL to contribute to the com mon pool, 
thereby putting it at a higher pedestal than the franchisees. Clause 4.1 of 
the Tripartite Agreement reads thus: 
“4.1 Tricon may at the request of TRIM, but subject to Tricon 
sole and absolute discretion pay to TRIM any such 
amount(s) as it may deem appropriate to support the VVIP 
activities during the Accounting Period for the avoidance of doubt, 
it is clarified and agreed between the Parties that Tricon shall 
have no obligation to pay any such amounts if it choo ses 
not to do so .” 
(emphasis supplied) 
Thus, clause 4.1 is not in confirmity with the terms of approval. 
Furthermore, it is noteworthy that the management of the assessee 
company was under full and absolute control of its parent c ompany 
YRIPL. Be it also noted that the participation of the franc hisees in the 
management of the assessee company was again subject to approval by 
YRIPL, which falls within its sole discretion. Clause 7.1 of the Tripartite 
Agreement reads thus: 
“7.1 The management and operations of TRIM will be carried 
out by its Board of Directors in accordance with the Articles of 
Association of TRIM, the terms of which shall be read as a part 
of this Agreement. The Board of Directors of TRIM will be 
nominated by Tricon from time to time in accordance with the 
Articles of Association of TRIM. The Board of Directors of TRIM 
shall consist of a minimum number of five directors. Out of the 
five directors Tricon may, in its absolute and sole discretion, 
nominate one representative each of two franchisees (to 
be selected by Tricon on a rational basis) to be appointed
as directors on the Board of Directors of TRIM such 
nominees to hold office for a period of one year from the date of 
their appointment. In the event the representative of the Franchisee 
is nominated to the Board of Directors of TRIM. Franchisee agrees 
and undertakes to cause such representative to (i) accept suc h 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
162 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
appointment as and when the same is made; and (ii) to resig n 
from the post of Director on the expiry of one year from the date 
of appointment or earlier, if so requested by Tricon.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
25. The net effect of the aforequoted clauses is to render the pre- 
conditions for the grant of approval, as otiose. It also beco mes amply 
clear that YRIPL and the franchisees stand on two substantially different 
footings. For, the franchisees are obligated to contribute a fixed percentage 
for the conduct of AMP activities whereas YRIPL is und er no such 
obligation in utter violation of the terms of SIA approval. Moreover, even 
upon request for the grant of funds by the assessee company, YRIPL is 
not bound to accede to the request and enjoys a “sole and ab solute” 
discretion to decide against such request. That members of a financ ial 
concern exercise mutual control over its management without the scope 
of prejudicial exercise of power by one class of members over the others 
is the quintessence for the existence of a mutual concern. The word 
“mutual” offers guidance to this effect. Literally understood, the word 
“mutual” points towards reciprocity and a mutual arrangement is one in 
which the members/parties have reciprocal rights or underst anding or 
arrangement. An arrangement wherein one member is subjected to the 
absolute discretion of another, in such a manner that the entire liability 
may fall upon one whereas benefits are reaped by all, is antithesis to the 
mutual character in the eyes of law. 
26. The contention advanced by the appellant that i t is not 
mandatory for every member of the mutual concern to contribute to the 
common pool fails to advance the case of the appellant. It is no doubt 
true that every member of the mutual concern might not be required to 
contribute to the common pool at all times. However, it does not mean 
that one member cannot be made to contribute under any pretext 
whatsoever. For, that would amount to the grant of an overriding position 
to a member in the mutual agreement, extending upto even overrul ing 
the requests for contribution from other members for mutual necessity. 
It is this all-pervasive overriding position of one member over the others 
that negates the effect of mutuality. There is a fine line of distinction 
between absence of obligation and presence of overriding discretion. In 
the present case, YRIPL enjoys the latter at the de triment of the 
franchisees of the purported undertaking, both in matters of contribution 
and management. In a mutual concern, it is no doubt true that an obligation

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
163 
to pay may or may not be there, but in the same breath, it is equally true 
that an overriding discretion of one member over others cannot be 
sustained, in order to preserve the real essence of mutual ity wherein 
members contribute for the mutual benefit of all and not of one at the 
cost of others. 
27. More importantly, an examination of the judicial decisions relied 
upon by the parties brings out the settled legal position that in order to 
qualify as a mutual concern, the contributors to the common fund either 
acquire a right to participate in the surplus or an entitlement to get back 
the remaining proportion of their respective contributions. In the present 
scheme of things, clause 8.4 provides that, 
“8.4 In the event there is any surplus left over in any of the Brand 
Funds at the end of an Accounting Period. TRIM shall be entitled 
to retain the surplus to be spent on AMP activities duri ng the 
following Accounting Period. Alternatively, TRIM may, subject 
to the approval of its Board of Directors, refund the surplus 
amounts to the franchisees including Franchisee in the same 
proportion as the actual Advertising Contribution made by each 
franchisee including Franchisee in that Accounting Period.” 
(emphasis supplied) 
28. Contrary to the abovestated legal position, clause 8.4 makes it 
clear that the franchisees do not enjoy any “entitlement” or “ right” on 
the surplus remaining after the operations have been ca rried out for a 
given assessment year. The clause provides that the assessee company 
may refund the surplus subject to the approval of its Board of Directors. 
It implies that the franchisees/contributors cannot claim a refund of their 
remaining amount as a matter of right. Be it noted that the raison d’etre 
behind the refund of surplus to the contributors or mandatory utilisation 
of the same in the subsequent assessment year is to reduce their burden 
of contribution in the next year proportionate to the surplus rem aining 
from the previous year. Thus, the fulfilment of this condition becomes 
essential. In the present case, even if any surplus is remaining in a given 
assessment year, it is unlikely to reduce the liability of the franchisees in 
the following year as their liability to the extent of 5 percent is fixed and 
non-negotiable, irrespective of whether any funds are surplus in the 
previous year. The only entity that could derive any benefit from the 
surplus funds is YRIPL, i.e. the parent company. This is antithetical to 
the third test of mutuality. 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
164 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
29. ‘Be that as it may, the dispensation predicated in the Tripartite 
Agreement may entail in a situation where YRIPL would not contribute 
even a single penny to the common pool and yet be able to derive profits 
in the form of royalties out of the purported mutual operations, created 
from the fixed 5 per cent contribution made by the franchisees . This 
would be nothing short of derivation of gains/profits out of inputs supplied 
by others. That cannot be countenanced as being violative of the b asic 
essence of mutuality. The doctrine of mutuality, in principle, entails that 
there should not be any profit earning motive, either directly or indirectly. 
The third test of mutuality, quoted above, requires that t he purported 
mutual operations must be marked by an impossibility of profits and this 
crucial test is also not fulfilled in the present case. 
30. Furthermore, the exemption granted to a mutual concern is 
premised on the assumption that the concern is being run for the mutual 
benefit of the contributors and the contributions made by the members 
ought to be directed in that direction. Contrary to this fundamental tenet, 
clause 8.1 of the Tripartite Agreement relieves the asses see company 
from any specific obligation of spending the amounts received by way 
of contributions for the benefit of the contributors. It explicates that the 
assessee company does not hold such amount under any implied trust
for the franchisees, and reads thus: 
“8.1 .... Notwithstanding the foregoing, any amount pa id by 
Franchisee to TRIM will not be required to be spent for the specific 
benefit, either direct or indirect, of Franchisee or the B usiness 
and no express or implied trust will be created in respect of such 
amount. Additionally, Franchisee will not have any claim or action 
against Tricon and/or TRIM in connection with the level of success 
of any such advertising, marketing, promotion, research or test.” 
31. A priori, it must follow that the assessee company had acted 
in contravention of the terms of approval. Notably, the SIA approval or 
Government approval was not only a binding document but also a 
conditional document with a defined set of precondi tions for the 
functioning of the assessee company as a mutual concern. The SIA 
approval categorically reads that the grant of approval is subject to the 
terms and conditions specified therein and any contravention thereof 
would be infraction of the mandate of the government approval. 
32. The appellant had urged that no fixed percentag e of 
contribution could be imputed upon YRIPL as it does not opera te any

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
165 
restaurant directly and thus, the actual volume of sa les cannot be 
determined. At the very outset, this argument holds no water as YRIPL 
receives fixed percentage of royalty from the franchisees on t he sales. 
We say so because if the franchisees could be obligated wit h a fixed 
percentage of contribution, 5 percent in the presen t case, it is 
unfathomable as to why the same obligation ought not to apply to YRIPL. 
33. Be it noted that the text of the Tripartite Agreement point s 
towards the true intent of the formation of the assessee com pany as a 
step down subsidiary. For, clause C predicates thus: 
“C. TRIM has been established as a wholly owned step down
subsidiary Tricon to manage of the retail restaurant business, the 
advertising medial and promotion at regional level and nationa l 
level of KFC. Pizza Hut and other brands currently owned or 
acquired in future by Tricon and on its parents and of its associate 
company.” 
In the absence of any ambiguity, the terms of a contract are to be 
understood in their ordinary and natural sense, thus revealing the true 
intent of the contracting parties. The aforequoted clause clea rly points 
towards the fact that the assessee company was formed t o manage 
business on behalf of the holding company. In its true form, it was not 
contemplated as a non-business concern because operations integral to 
the functioning of a business were entrusted to it. 
34. The doctrine of mutuality bestows a special status to qualify 
for exemption from tax liability. It is a settled propos ition of law that 
exemptions are to be put to strict interpretation. The appe llant having 
failed to fulfil the stipulations and to prove the existence of mutuality, the 
question of extending exemption from tax liability to the appellant, that 
too at the cost of public exchequer, does not arise. Taking any other 
view would entail in stretching the limits of construction. In The Law of 
Taxation by Thomas M. Cooley 8, the rule regarding strict construction 
of exemptions is succinctly summarised thus: 
“672. Strict construction-Rule stated. An intention on the part 
of the legislature to grant an exemption from the taxing power of 
the state will never be implied from language which will admit of 
any other reasonable construction. Such an intention must be 
expressed in clear and unmistakable terms, or must appear by 
8 Thomas M. Cooley, The Law of Taxation, 4th Edition , Volume 2, Pg. 671 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
166 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
necessary implication from the language used, for it is a wel l- 
settled principle that, when a special privilege or exempt ion is 
claimed under a statute, charter or act of incorporation, it is to be 
construed strictly against the property owner and in favour of the 
public. This principle applies with peculiar force t o a claim of 
exemption from taxation. Exemptions are never presumed, the 
burden is on a claimant to establish clearly his right to exemption, 
and an alleged grant of exemption will be strictly construed and
cannot be made out by inference or implication but must be beyond 
reasonable doubt. ....... Moreover, if an exemption is found to 
exist, it must not be enlarged by construction, since the reasonable 
presumption is that the state has granted in express term s all it 
intended to grant at all, and that unless the privilege is limited to 
the very terms of the statute the favour would be extended beyond 
what was meant…” 
35. The assessee company has relied upon reported decisions to 
establish a parallel between the operations carried out by itself and clubs. 
Upon closer scrutiny, however, we find that the authorities cited by the 
appellant do not advance its case because of the structural dif ferences 
between the operations carried out by the purported mutual co ncern 
(assessee company) and clubs. In the case of clubs, the oper ations are 
exempted from taxability because of the underlying notion t hat they 
operate for the common benefit of the members wishing to enter into a 
social exchange with no commercial intent. Further, all the members of 
the club not only have a common identity in the concern but also stand 
on an equal footing in terms of their rights and liabilities towards the club 
or the mutual undertaking. Such clubs are a means of social intercourse, 
as rightly observed by CIT (A) in the present case, and are not formed
for the facilitation of any commercial activity. On the contrary, the 
purported mutual concern in the present case undertakes a commercial 
venture wherein contributions are accepted both from the member s as 
well as non-members, as discussed earlier. Moreover, one membe r is 
vested with a myriad set of powers to control the functioning and interests 
of other members (franchisees), even to their detri ment. Such an 
assimilation cannot be termed as a case of ordinary social intercourse 
devoid of commerciality.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
167 
Re: question No. (ii): 
36. Once it is conclusively determined that the assessee company 
had not operated as a mutual concern, there would be no question of
extending exemption from tax liability. Be that as it may, to support an 
alternative claim for exemption, the assessee company took a plea in the 
written submissions that it was acting under a Trust for the contributors, 
and was under an overriding obligation to spend the amounts received 
for advertising, marketing and promotional activities. It is urged that once 
the incoming amount is earmarked for an obligation, it does not become 
“income” in the hands of the assessee as no occasion for the application 
of such income arises. 
37. In the written submissions, the assessee compan y has 
contended thus: 
“The Hon’ble High Court further erred in not adjudicating the 
specific ground raised by the Appellant that the contributions 
received by the Appellant cannot be said to be its income because 
the Appellant merely holds them as a trustee and also under an
overriding obligation to spend such contributions received for AMP 
activities.” 
38. The law on what amounts to a case of diversion before accrual 
and what amounts to application post accrual is well settled and can be 
summarised by making reference to Dalmia Cement Ltd., Rajasthanv. 
Commissioner of Income Tax, New Delhi 9, wherein the following 
extract of TheCommissioner of Income Tax, Bombay City II v. 
Sitaldas Tirathdas 10 was quoted with approval: 
“16… In our opinion, the true test is whether the amount sought 
to be deducted, in truth, never reached the assessee as his income. 
Obligations, no doubt, there are in every case, but it is the nature 
of the obligation which is the decisive fact. There is a difference 
between an amount which a person is obliged to apply out of his 
income and an amount which by the nature of the obligation cannot 
be said to be a part of the income of the assessee. Whereby the 
obligation income is diverted before it reaches the assessee, it is 
deductible; but where the income is required to be applied to 
discharge an obligation after such income reaches the assess ee, 
9 (1999) 4 SCC 124 
10 AIR 1961 SC 728 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
168 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2020] 11 S.C.R. 
the same consequence, in law, does not follow. It is the first kind 
of payment which can truly be excused and not the second. The 
second payment is merely an obligation to pay another portion of 
one’s own income, which has been received and is since applied. 
The first is a case in which the income never reaches the assessee, 
who even if he were to collect it, does so, not as part of his income, 
but for and on behalf of the person to whom it is payable...”
Furthermore, in Associated Power Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of 
Income Tax 11 , this Court again observed thus: 
“13. The application of the doctrine of diversion of income by 
reason of an over-riding title is quite inapposite. The doctrine applies 
when, by reason of an over-riding title or obligation, income is 
diverted and never reaches the person in whose hands it is sought
to be assessed...” 
Similarly, in The Commissioner of Income Tax, Kerala, 
Ernakulam v. The Travancore Sugars & Chemical Ltd. 12 , this 
Court restated thus: 
“22… It is thus clear that where by the obligation income is 
diverted before it reaches the assessee, it is deductible. But, where 
the income is required to be applied to discharge an oblig ation 
after such income reaches the assessee it is merely a c ase of 
application of income to satisfy an obligation of payment and is 
therefore not deductible.” 
39. The CIT (A), while rejecting this ground, relied upon Sitaldas 
Tirathdas (supra), and observed thus: 
“... Where an assessee applies an income to discharge an obligation 
after the income reaches the hands of the assessee, it would b e 
an application of income and this would resulting taxation of such 
income in the hands of the appellant.” 
40. We note that the same ground was also pressed in appeal 
before the Tribunal which finds mention in the Tribunal’s or der dated 
31.01.2008 in the following words: 
“(b) In failing to consider and appreciate that the amount received 
by the appellant from the franchisees towards adver tising 
11 (1996) 7 SCC 221 
12 (1973) 3 SCC 274

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
169 
contributions are diverted at source by overriding title for being
spent on advertisement ..” 
However, the Tribunal did not record any observation addressing 
this ground in the abovesaid order. It has been brought to our notice that 
the assessee company has made an application under section 254(2) of 
the 1961 Act for rectification of the Tribunal’s order citi ng an error 
apparent on the face of the record. The said application is state d to be 
pending. 
41. Considering the fact that the question of diversion by overriding 
title was neither framed nor agitated in the appeal memo b efore the 
High Court or before this Court (except a brief mention in th e written 
submissions), coupled with the fact that neither the Tribunal nor the High 
Court has dealt with that plea and that the rectification application raising 
that ground is still undecided and stated to be pending before the Tribunal, 
we deem it appropriate to leave it open to the appellan t to pursue the 
rectification application, if so advised. We may not be under stood to 
have expressed any opinion either way as regards the tenabili ty of the 
said application or otherwise. 
42. In view of the aforestated terms, the questions posed for our 
consideration stand answered against the appellant (assessee company) 
and in favour of the Revenue and the appeal stands disposed of upholding 
the impugned judgment with liberty to the appellant to pursue remedy of 
rectification, as per law. There shall be no order as to c osts. Pending 
interlocutory applications, if any, shall also stand disposed of. 
Bibhuti Bhushan BoseAppeal disposed of. 
YUM! RESTAURANTS (MKTG.) PVT. LTD. v. COMMISSIONER OF 
INCOME TAX, DELHI [A. M. KHANWILKAR, J.]