A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
1
STATE OF PUNJAB
v.
KEWAL KRISHAN
(Criminal Appeal No. 2128 of 2014)
JUNE 21, 2023
[B. V . NAGARATHNA AND MANOJ MISRA, JJ.]
Penal Code, 1860 – s. 302 – Acquittal confirmed –
Prosecution case that the deceased was last seen aliv e in his own
house in the company of the accused at about 7.00 p .m. on
10.12.1998 – PW-6, nephew of the deceased discovere d body of
deceased on 12.12.1998 – FIR was registered – Name of the accu sed
did not surface on the record till 25.12.1998 – PW-2, the sole wit ness
of the last seen circumstance, in his deposition in court, stated that
he had expressed his suspicion in respect of accused’ s i nvolvement
to the police on 13.12.1998 – It was also alleged that accused made
an extra-judicial confession before PW-3 – Accused made a
disclosure to the police regarding knife used in the crime , which led
to its recovery – Trial Court convicted and sentenced the res pondent
u/s. 302 – However, the High Court acquitted him – On appeal,
held: The High Court opined that if PW-2 was aware of the last
seen circumstance and had made such a disclosure, the re was no
reason for the police not to act against the accused till 25.12.1998
– Therefore, the statement of PW-2 in respect of imparting knowledge
of the last seen circumstance appeared doubtful and it appeared
that the witness was set up to create link evidence – The alleged
date and time when the deceased was last seen alive was at quite a
distance from the date and time when the deceased was found dea d
– There was no evidence as to when the accused left the house and
that no one else could have entered the house in the interregnum,
other intervening circumstances including hand of some third p erson
in the crime was not ruled out by the prosecution e vidence –
Recovery of the knife was denied by the accused and there was no
serologist report to connect it with the crime – Insofar as the evidence
of extra judicial confession made by the accused is concern ed, there
was no evidence to demonstrate that the accused had any prior
relations with PW-3 or that the accused hoped for, or sought, any
help from PW-3 and, therefore, made the confession to him – No tably,
[2023] 10 S.C.R. 1 : 2023 INSC 583
1

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
2 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2023] 10 S.C.R.
the accused denied making any such confession – The incriminat ing
circumstances were not proved beyond reasonable dou bt and
otherwise also the circumstance of last seen was inc onclusive, the
High Court was justified in setting aside the order of conviction
recorded by the Trial Court.
Evidence – Circumstantial evidence – Held: It is trite law that
to convict an accused on the basis of circumstantial evidence, the
prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt each of the
incriminating circumstances on which it proposes to rely; the
circumstance(s) relied upon must be of a definite tendency unerringly
pointing towards accused’s guilt and must form a ch ain so far
complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that wi thin all
human probability it is the accused and no one else who had
committed the crime and they (it) must exclude all other hyp othesis
inconsistent with his guilt and consistent with his innoce nce.
Evidence Act, 1872 – s. 106 – Section 106 of the Evi dence
Act does not absolve the prosecution of discharging its primary
burden of proving the prosecution case beyond reasonable doub t –
It is only when the prosecution has led evidence which, if be lieved,
will sustain a conviction, or which makes out a prima facie case, the
question arises of considering facts of which the b urden of proof
would lie upon the accused.
State of U.P . v. Sahai (1982) 1 SCC 352; State of M.P .
v. Paltan Mallah (2005) 3 SCC 169 : [2005] 1 SCR
710; Basheera Begam v. Mohd. Ibrahim (2020) 11 SCC
174 : [2020] 3 SCR 562; Shivaji Chintappa Patil v.
State of Maharashtra (2021) 5 SCC 626 – relied on.
Case Law Reference
[2005] 1 SCR 710 relied on Para 14
[2020] 3 SCR 562 relied on Para 15
CRIMINAL APPELLA TE JURISDICTION: Criminal Appeal No.
2128 of 2014.
From the Judgment and Order dated 01.05.2012 of the High Court
of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh in CRLA No. 372 of 2002.
Mohit Siwach, Karan Sharma, Advs. for the Appellant.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
3
The following Judgment of the Court was delivered:
JUDGMENT
1. Counsel for the appellant is present. None has appeared f or
the respondent. The office has submitted a report that notice has been
served on the sole respondent, yet no one has entered appearance on his
behalf.
2. We have heard Mr. Mohit Siwach, learned counsel for the
appellant.
3. This appeal assails the judgment and order of the High Court of
Punjab & Haryana (for short the High Court) dated 01.05.2012 rendered
in Criminal Appeal No. 372 of 2002, whereby the judgment and order of
the trial Court convicting and sentencing the respondent (Kewal Krishan)
under Section 302, IPC has been set aside and the appellant (respondent
herein) has been acquitted of the charges for which he was tried.
4. The prosecution case rests on evidence in respect of following
circumstances:
(a) The deceased was last seen alive in his own house in the
company of the accused at about 7.00 p.m. on 10.12.1998
by PW-2.
(b) Dead body of the deceased with multiple injuries w as found
in his house by PW-6, nephew of the deceased, on
12.12.1998 at around 1.00 pm.
(c) Autopsy conducted on 12.12.1998, at about 4.15 p m,
reflected that death of the deceased could have occurred
within two days, as a result of shock and haemorrhage, due
to ante mortem incised wounds.
(d) Accused made an extra-judicial confession before P.W-3
on 25.12.1998 and was thereafter handed over to the police
on the same day.
(e) Accused made a disclosure to the police on 25.12.199 8 with
regard to the place where he hid the knife used in the crime,
which led to the recovery of a Khanjar (knife) (Ex.P-1).
(f) The autopsy surgeon opined that the incised wounds found
on deceased’s body could have been caused by use of that
Khanjar.
STATE OF PUNJAB v. KEWAL KRISHAN

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
4 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2023] 10 S.C.R.
5. The trial Court found those circumstances proved and forming
a chain so complete as to conclusively indicate that it was the a ccused
and no one else who committed the murder and thus convicted and
sentenced the accused accordingly.
6. Aggrieved by his conviction, the accused went in appeal to the
High Court.
7. The High Court noticed that the accused in his statement under
section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 had denied the
incriminating circumstances appearing against him in the prosecution
evidence and had claimed that he was arrested on 12.12.1998 itself on
false implication. Thereafter, the High Court, on a careful analysis of the
evidence, more particularly the statement made by PW- 2 that on
13.12.1998 he had disclosed to the police about the involvement of the
accused, doubted the date of arrest of the appellant (i.e., 25.12.1998), as
set up by the prosecution, and opined that the stateme nt of PW-2
probabilizes the claim of the accused that he was arrested on 12.12.1998
itself. The High Court found PW-2’s evidence of last seen not convincing
and reliable inasmuch as if on 13.12.1998 PW-2 had informed the police
about his suspicion in respect of the involvement of the a ccused, the
police would have arrested the accused forthwith and not wait ed till
25.12.1998. But the record indicated that the name of the accused came
to light for the first time on 25.12.1998. In these circumstances, the High
Court found PW-2 unreliable, as being a witness who was set up lat er.
Otherwise also, the High Court found that last seen circumst ance did
not conclusively point towards the guilt of the accused by excluding all
hypotheses consistent with his innocence, inasmuch as there was a huge
time gap between the date and time when the deceased was last seen in
the company of the accused and discovery of deceased’s dea d body.
Further, the High Court took note of the circumstance that the autopsy
conducted on 12.12.1998 at 4.15 pm indicated occurence of rigor mortis
on lower limbs, which suggested that death could have occurred within
30 hours of the autopsy, thereby throwing open the possibility of death
occurring much later than at 7.00 pm on 10.11.1998, when the deceased
was allegedly seen in the company of the accused. Taking note of the
above and bearing in mind that the accused did not reside wi th the
deceased and no evidence was led that except the accused no one else
could have entered the house of the deceased in the interregnum , the
last seen circumstance was found inconclusive.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
5
8. In respect of the circumstance of recovery of the knife, t he
High Court, firstly, doubted the date of arrest, as noticed above , and,
secondly, noticed that there was no serologist report to ascertain whether
the knife was stained with human blood as to connect it with the crime.
9. The High Court also discarded the extra judicial confession on
the ground that there was no cogent explanation set out in the prosecution
evidence to demonstrate as to why the accused would make a confession
to P.W.3, particularly, when the accused had no significant relationship
with PW-3 and PW-3 could not have helped him. The extra judicial
confession was also doubted on the ground that the date of arrest of the
accused (i.e., 25.12.1998) appeared doubtful, inasmuch as there was a
high probability of the accused being arrested earlier i.e., 12.12.1998, as
claimed by him, because from the statement of PW-2 it appea red that
the police was informed by him on 13.12.1998 itself in respect of his
suspicion regarding the involvement of the accused.
10. After a thorough analysis of the evidence as highlighted above,
the High Court found that, firstly, the incriminating circumstances were
not proved beyond reasonable doubt and, secondly, they did not constitute
a chain so complete as to conclusively indicate that it was the a ccused
and no one else who, in all human probability, committed the cri me.
Consequently, the High Court set aside the order of the trial Court and
acquitted the accused of the charge.
11. Learned counsel for the State (appellant) has submitted tha t
there was no proven enmity of the witnesses with the accused. In these
circumstances, there was no occasion for the High Court to dou bt the
testimony of the prosecution witnesses in respect of the incr iminating
circumstances laid out by the prosecution. In such a situation there was
no justification to reverse the conviction recorded by the trial Court. It
was argued that the deceased was last seen alive, having liquor with the
accused, in the evening of 10.12.1998 and thereafter the deceased was
not seen alive by anyone. The autopsy report probabilizes death of the
deceased at around the same time when he was last seen in the company
of the accused. In these circumstances, the burden was on the accused
to prove as to when he left company of the deceased. In absence
whereof, coupled with other circumstances, accused’s conviction was
justified. Therefore, the High Court fell in error by se tting aside the
judgment of the trial Court and acquitting the respondent.
STATE OF PUNJAB v. KEWAL KRISHAN

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
6 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2023] 10 S.C.R.
12. We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel
for the appellant and have perused the record carefully.
13. Before we proceed further, it would be apposite to notice the
law as to when it would be appropriate for this Court, exercising power
under Article 136 of the Constitution of India, to interfere with an order
of acquittal passed by the High Court while reversing an or der of
conviction recorded by the Trial Court. The law in this re gard is well
settled. Normally, this Court is reluctant to interfere w ith an order of
acquittal. But when it appears that the High Court has on an absolutely
wrong process of reasoning and a legally erroneous a nd perverse
approach to the facts of the case and ignoring some of the mos t vital
facts, acquitted the respondent and the order of acquittal passed by the
High Court has resulted in a grave and substantial miscarriage of justice,
extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of India
may rightfully be exercised (See : State of U.P . v. Sahai, (1982) 1 SCC
352).
14. In State of M.P . v. Paltan Mallah, (2005) 3 SCC 169 reiterating
the same view it was observed:
“8…….. This being an appeal against acquittal, this Court would
be slow in interfering with the findings of the High Court, unless
there is perverse appreciation of the evidence which resulte d in
serious miscarriage of justice and if the High Court has taken a
plausible view this Court would not be justified in interfering with
the acquittal passed in favour of the accused and if two views are
possible and the High Court had chosen one view which is just
and reasonable, then also this Court would be reluctant to interfere
with the judgment of the High Court.”
15. In a recent decision rendered by this Court in Basheera Begam
v. Mohd. Ibrahim, (2020) 11 SCC 174, it was observed:
“190. ………..Reversal of a judgment and order of conviction
and acquittal of the accused should not ordinarily be interfered
with unless such reversal/acquittal is vitiated by perversity. In other
words, the court might reverse an order of acquittal if the c ourt
finds that no person properly instructed in law could have upon
analysis of the evidence on record found the accused to be “not
guilty”.”

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
7
16. In light of the law noticed above, we would have to examine,
firstly, whether the High Court ignored or misread any material piece of
evidence which has resulted in miscarriage of justice; secondly, whether
there is any perversity in the appreciation of evidence; and, thirdly, whether
the view taken by the High Court is a plausible view.
17. This is a case based on circumstantial evidence. It is trite law
that to convict an accused on the basis of circumstantial e vidence, the
prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt each of the incriminating
circumstances on which it proposes to rely; the circumstance(s) relied
upon must be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards accused’s
guilt and must form a chain so far complete that there is no escape from
the conclusion that within all human probability it is the accused and no
one else who had committed the crime and they (it) must exclu de all
other hypothesis inconsistent with his guilt and consist ent with his
innocence.
18. In the instant case, we notice from the record that th e dead
body of the deceased, lying in a naked condition in his house, was first
discovered by PW-6, nephew of the deceased, on 12.12.1998 at around
1.00 pm. Upon discovery of the dead body, on the information provided
by PW-6, FIR was registered against unknown accused and inquest etc.
was carried out. What is important is that the name of the accus ed did
not surface on the record till 25.12.1998, that is when he was allegedly
handed over to the police by PW-3 upon a confession made by hi m
before PW-3. PW-2, the sole witness of the last seen circumst ance, in
his deposition in court, stated that he had expressed his sus picion in
respect of accused’s involvement to the police on 13.12.1998. The High
Court opined that if PW-2 was aware of the last seen circumstance and
had made such a disclosure, there was no reason for the polic e not to
act against the accused till 25.12.1998. Therefore, the statement of PW-
2 in respect of imparting knowledge of the last seen cir cumstance
appeared doubtful and it appeared that the witness was set up to create
link evidence. The High Court also noticed that the alleged date and
time when the deceased was last seen alive was at quite a distance
from the date and time when the deceased was found dead. Indisputably
the deceased was found dead in his own house where the accused did
not reside. The deceased was allegedly last seen alive in the company
of the accused in the evening at around 7 pm of 10.12.1998 whereas the
body of the deceased was found 2 days later, on 12.12.1998. Autopsy
STATE OF PUNJAB v. KEWAL KRISHAN

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
8 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2023] 10 S.C.R.
report, based on autopsy conducted at around 4.15 pm on 12.12.1998,
noted occurance of rigor mortis in the lower limbs, which gives rise to
a possibility of death being within 30 hours of the autopsy, meaning thereby
that death might have occurred much after 7 pm of 10.12.1998. In such
circumstances, bearing in mind that the deceased was found dead in his
own house, where the accused did not reside, and there was no evidence
as to when the accused left the house and that no one else could ha ve
entered the house in the interregnum, other intervening circums tances
including hand of some third person in the crime was not ruled out by the
prosecution evidence. For the reasons above, we are of the considered
view that the High Court was justified in doubting the testimony of PW-
2 and finding the last seen circumstance inconclusive in pointing towards
the guilt of the accused by excluding other hypotheses consist ent with
his innocence.
19. As regards recovery of the Khanjar (knife) is concerned, the
same was denied by the accused and there was no serologist report to
connect it with the crime. Therefore, it had very little incriminating value
to sustain conviction on its own basis. Moreover, the High Cour t, on
strength of the circumstances appearing in the evidence, dou bted the
date of arrest and, upon consideration of the circumstance s, accepted
the possibility of the arrest of the accused being much earlier in point of
time, as claimed by the accused, than what was set up by the prosecution.
In such circumstances, the recovery, which was made on 25.12.1998,
allegedly on disclosure made by the accused on 25.12.1998, becomes
doubtful. The view of the High Court in this regard cannot be termed
perverse as to warrant interference by this Court.
20. Insofar as the evidence of extra judicial confession made by
the accused is concerned, the same was provided by PW-3, a mem ber
of the Panchayat wherein the deceased resided. Ordinarily a person
makes a confession either to absolve oneself of the burden of guilt or to
seek protection under the hope that the person to whom confess ion is
made would protect him. Normally a confession to absolve onese lf of
the guilt is made to a person on whom the confessor reposes confidence.
The High Court noticed that there was no evidence to demonstrate that
the accused had any prior relations with PW-3 or that the accused hoped
for, or sought, any help from PW-3 and, therefore, made the confession
to him. Notably, the accused denied making any such confession. F or

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
9
the reasons above, including other, which need not be put on record, the
High Court discarded the circumstance of the accuse d making a
confession before PW-3 on 25.12.1998. Otherwise also, an extra judicial
confession is a very weak type of evidence and solely on its ba sis a
conviction is not ordinarily to be recorded.
21. The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant th at
since there was no proven enmity between the accused and the witnesses
therefore there was no reason to disbelieve them, would not be of much
help to the appellant because this is a case based on ci rcumstantial
evidence. In a case based on circumstantial evidence not only do e ach
of the incriminating circumstances have to be proved beyond reasonable
doubt but those incriminating circumstances must constitute a chain so
far complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that within all
human probability it is the accused who has committed the crime and
further, cumulatively, they must exclude all hypotheses consistent with
the innocence of the accused and inconsistent with his guilt. As we have
found that the incriminating circumstances were not prove d beyond
reasonable doubt and otherwise also the circumstance of last seen was
inconclusive, in our view, the High Court was justified in setting aside
the order of conviction recorded by the Trial Court.
22. The argument that the accused has failed to discharge his
burden under section 106 of the Evidence Act and, ther efore, his
conviction was justified is misconceived. Section 106 of the Evidence
Act does not absolve the prosecution of discharging its primary burden
of proving the prosecution case beyond reasonable doubt. It is only when
the prosecution has led evidence which, if believed, w ill sustain a
conviction, or which makes out a prima facie case, the question arises
of considering facts of which the burden of proof would lie upon t he
accused. (See: Shivaji Chintappa Patil v. State of Maharashtra (2021)
5 SCC 626). Here, as we have discussed above, firstly, the incriminating
circumstances were not proved beyond reasonable doubt and, secondly,
they do not form a chain so complete from which it could be i nferred
with a degree of certainty that it is the accused and no one e lse who,
within all human probability, committed the crime. In these circumstances,
there was no occasion to place burden on the accused with the a id of
section 106 of the Evidence Act to prove his innocence or t o disclose
that he parted company of the deceased before his murder.
STATE OF PUNJAB v. KEWAL KRISHAN

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
10 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2023] 10 S.C.R.
23. For all the reasons above, while keeping in mind that the view
taken by the High Court is a plausible view and that it was not pointed
out that any material evidence was ignored or misread, we do not find a
good reason to interfere with the order of acquittal passed by t he High
Court.
24. The appeal is accordingly, dismissed.
Ankit Gyan Appeal dismissed.
(Assisted by : Mahendra Yadav, LCRA)