(2016] 11 S.C.R. 149 
BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LIMITED 
v. 
MR. S.L. SEAL ADDL. SECRETARY (STEEL & MINES) 
GOVERNMENT OF ODISHA & ORS. 
(Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 275 of2016) 
IN 
(Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 374 of2012) 
IN 
(Civil Appeal No. 2790 of2012) 
DECEMBER 15, 2016 
[A. K. SIKRI AND ABHAY MANOHAR SAPRE, JJ.) 
Contempt of Court - Petitioner-Company applied for grant 
of lease for mining iron ore for use in its proposed steel plant -
Application disallowed by the State Government - Petitioner­
Company filed writ petition, which was dismissed - Petitioner filed 
SLP against the dismissal, which was allowed - Supreme Court vide 
iudgment dated 14.03.2012 directed the State Government to 
recommend the case of petitioner to the Central Government -
Direction not implemented - Contempt petition filed by petitioner­
company against the State - Supreme Court vide order dated 
22.04.2014 directed the State Government to comply with the earlier 
direction in terms of MoU entered between the parties - Instant 
contempt petition filed by the petitioner-company pleading that the 
State Government did not purge the contempt - Held: As per the 
law prevailing at that time, the role of the State Government was 
·only to send the recommendations to the Central Government for 
allotting· mining areas -,. Ultimate authority/power was vested with 
the Central Government to take a decision on the said request of 
the State Government - Since the State Government had sent the 
necessary letter of request to the Central Government, direction 
contained in the judgment dated 14.03.2012 stood compliedwith -
As Central Government was not party in the contempt proceeding, 
no direction was ever given by Supreme Court to the Central 
Government - On contrary, it was observed in order dated 
22.04.2014 that it would be for the Central Government to consider 
the recommendations of the State Government on its own merits and 
in accordance with law - If that has not been done by the Central 
149 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

150 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS r2o 161 11 s.c.R. 
Government, it cannot be subject 111atter of the instant Conte111pt 
Petition, which is accordingly closed - Mines and Minerals 
(Develop111ent and Regulation) Act, 1957 - Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015. 
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 
1957 - ss. 5(1), 10A{2J(c), 11 and JJA - Mines and Minerals 
(Develop111ent and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 - Petitioner­
Co111pany applied for grant of lease for 111ining iron ore for use in 
the proposed plant - Its application recommended to the Central 
Govern111ent by the Stale Government - Central Government look 
the view that granting of lease has to be dealt with in accordance 
with new provisions of the Ame11d111e//f Act, 2015 and under new 
scheme, the petitioner '.I· request stood invalidated - Plea of 
Petitioner-Company that the State Government had issued 'Letter 
of Intent', therefore, its application was protected u/s. JOA(2){c) of 
the amended Act - Held: Previous approval of the Central 
Government was essential for the State Govern111ent to enter into 
any lease agreement/contract with the prospecting licensee - Without 
such approval, the State Government could not co111111unicate to the 
prospecting licensee/lessee its intention to enter into any contract -
Jn instant case, Letter issued to the Central Government by the State 
Government was only reco111111endatory in nature and ultimate 
decision rested with the Central Government - Therefore, letter issued 
was not 'Letter of Intent' and application of Petitioner not covered 
by clause (c) of section 10A(2) of the Act. 
Closing the contempt petition, the Court 
HELD: 1. In the instant case, direction was given to the 
State Government to send the recommendation for grant of mining 
lease to the petitioner. As per the law prevailing at that time, the 
role of the State Government was only to send the 
recommendation to the Central Government for allotting mining 
areas. Ultimate authority/power was vested with the Central 
Government to take a decision on the said request of the State 
Government. Since the Sta~e Government had even refused to 
send such a request, this Court was of the view that the act of the 
State Government in refusing to send recommendation was 
contrary to the MoU and direction was issued to do the needful. 
In the order passed in Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 374 of 2012,

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. MR. S.L. SEAL ADDL. 
SECY. (STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA 
this was made clear by observing that insofar as the State 
Government is concerned, it is obliged to comply therewith and 
such matters, along with other relevant considerations, can be 
left to the Central Government while taking a decision on the 
recommendation of the State Government. That since the Union 
of India was not a party, no direction was given to it. On the 
contrary, it was left to the Central Government to take an 
appropriate decision on the recommendation'of the State 
Government. This was made clear in the judgment in Contempt 
Petition (Civil) No. 374 of 2012 by observing that it would be for 
the Central Government to consider the said recommendations 
on its own merits and in accordance with law. Since the State 
Government had sent the necessary letter of request to the 
Central Government, direction contained in the judgment dated 
March 14, 2012 stands complied with. (Paras 14, 15)[164-F-H; 
165-A-C) 
Whether the application of the petitioner is rendered ineligible 
in view of Section lOA of the Mines and Minerals (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1957 or whether it still survives. 
2.1 As per sub-section (1) of Section lOA of the Mines 
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, all 
applications received prior to coming into force of the 
Amendment Act, 2015, become ineligible. Before the passing 
of the Amendment Act, 2015, it was the Central Government 
which had the ultimate control over the grant of licenses 
insofar as mining of major minerals is concerned. As per the 
procedure then existing, State Government could recommend 
the application submitted by any applicant for grant of mining 
lease to the Central Government and the Central Government 
was given the power to grant or refuse to grant the approval. 
Thus, 'previous approval' from the Central Government was 
essential for grant of lease, without which the State Government 
could not enter into any such lease agreement with the applicant. 
Shortcomings of this procedure were noticed by Supreme Court 
in its judgment 'CPIL case'. Susequently, Mining Ordinance, 
2015 was passed which was ultimately replaced when the 
Parliament enacted the Amendment Act, 2015. [Paras 15, 16)(165-
C, E-G; 166-,\-BJ 
151 
A 
8 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

152 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2016] 11 S.C.R. 
2.2 Amended Section 11 now makes it clear that the mining 
leases arc to be granted by auction. It is for this reason that sub­
section (1) of Section lOA mandates that all applications received 
prior to January 12, 2015 shall become ineligible. 
Notwithstanding, sub-section (2) thereof carves out exceptions 
by saving certain categories of applications even filed before the 
Amendment Act, 2015 came into operation. Three kinds of 
applications are saved. [Para 21](167-C-D] 
2.3 First, applications received under Section llA of the 
Act. Section UA empowers the Central Government to select 
certain kinds of companies mentioned in the said Section, through 
auction by competitive bidding on such terms and conditions, as 
may be prescribed, for the purpose of granting reconnaissance 
permit, prospecting license or mining lease in respect of any area 
containing coal or lignite. Second category of applications, which 
are kept eligible under the new provision, are those where the 
reconnaissance, permit or prospecting license had been granted 
and the permit holder or the licensee, as the case may be, had 
undertaken reconnaissance operations or prospecting operations. 
Third category is that category of applicants where the Central 
Government had already communicated previous approval under 
Section 5(1) of the Act for grant of mining lease or the State 
Government had issued Letter of Intent to grant a mining lease 
before coming into force of the Amendment Act, 2015. Here 
again, the raison d'etre is that certain right had accrued to these 
applicants inasmuch as all the necessary procedures and 
formalities were complied with under the unamended provisions 
and only formal lease deed remained to be executed. Herc, the 
petitioner seeks to cover its case under the third category with 
the plea that insofar as the State Government is concerned, it 
had issued 'Letter of Intent'. [Paras 21 to 23](167-E, G-H; 168-B­
D] 
2.4 In the present case, the petitioner is treating letter, 
which was sent by the State Government to the Central 
Government with a request to the Central Government to give · 
its approval for grant of mineral concessions, as the 'Letter of 
Intent'. However, it is substantive nature of the letter in question 
that would determine as to whether it can be treated as the Letter

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. MR. S.L. SEAL ADDL. 
SECY. (STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA 
of Intent. As per legal dictionary, Letter of Intent is a document 
that describe the preliminary understanding between the parties 
who intend to make a contract or join together in another action. 
Further, this Court has held that Letter of Intent merely indicates 
a party's intention to enter into contract with other party in future. 
Applying the aforesaid meaning, it cannot be said that letter dated 
May 24, 2014 of the State Government would constitute a Letter 
of Intent. [Paras 23, 24 and 25][168-E, G; 170-C-F, HJ 
2.5 In order to enable the State Government to enter into 
any lease agreement/contract with the prospecting licensee, 
'previous approval' of the Central Government was essential. 
Unless such approval came, the State Government could not 
communicate to the prospecting licensee/lessee its intention to 
enter into any contract as the pre-requisite prior approval. woulil 
be lacking. Therefore, no promise could. be held by the State 
Government to any applicant showing its intention to enter into a 
contract in the future. Position would have been different had 
letter been issued after receiving previous approval ofthe Central 
Government. However, that is not so. This letter to the Central 
Government was only recommendatory in nature and ultimate 
decision rested with the Central Government. It is a different 
thing if the Central Government refuses to give its approval on 
any extraneous reasons or ma/a /ides or does not take into 
consideration relevant factors/material while rejecting the 
application, which may form a different cause of action and may 
become a reason to challenge the action of the Central 
Government rejecting the application on the grounds that are 
available in law to seekjudicial review of such an action. However, 
that situation is not being dealt in the instant case. The letter 
dated May 24, 2014 cannot be termed as 'Letter oflntent'. The 
application of the petitioner, therefore, would not be covered by 
clause (e) of Section 10A(2) of the Act. [Para 25)(170-D-G; 171-
A) 
2.6 The petitioner herein had originally succeeded in the 
appeal inasmuch as judgment dated March 14, 2012 was rendered 
giving direction to the State Government to recommend the case 
of the petitioner, in terms of the MoU entered into between the 
parties, to the Central Government. This was not done and the 
153 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

154 SUPREME COURT REPORTS f20 I 61 I I S.C.R. 
A decision was reiterated in orders dated April 22, 2014 passed in 
Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 374 of 2012. It is possible that bad 
the State Government acted promptly and sent the 
recommendations earlier, the Central Government might have 
accorded its approval. However, whether it could have done so 
B or not would be in the realm of conjectures. Insofar as the Central 
Government is concerned, no direction was ever given by this 
Court. On the contrary, it was categorically observed in the order 
dated April 22, 2014 in Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 374 of 2012 
that it would be for the Central Government to consider the 
recommendations of the State Government on its own merits and 
C in accordance with law. If that bas not been done by the Central 
Government, it cannot be the subject matter of present Contempt 
Petition. [Para 26] [171-B-D] 
Rishi Kiran Logistics Private Limited v. Board of Ti-ustees 
of Kand/a Port Trust and Others (2015) 13 SCC 233 : 
D 2015 (5) SCR 411; Rajasthan Cooperative Dairy 
Federation Ltd. v. Maha Laxmi Mingrate Marketing 
Service Pvt. Ltd. and Ors. (1996) 10 SCC 405 : 1996 
(6) Suppl. SCR 368 - relied on. 
Bhushan Power & Steel Ltd. v. State ofOrissa (2012) 4 
SCC 246: 2012 (5) SCR 16; Bhushan Power and Steel 
E Limited and Ors. v. Rajesh Verma and Ors. (2014) 5 
SCC 551: 2014 (5) SCR 493; Sandur Manganese and 
Iron Ores Limited i: State of Karnataka & Ors. (2010) 
13 SCC 1: 2010 (11) SCR 240; Centre for Public 
Interest Litigation v. Union of India (2012) 3 SCC 1 
F : 2012 (3) SCR 147; Re.: Sp!. Ref No. I of 2012 (2012) 
10 SCC :2012 (9) SCR 311 - referred to. 
Case Law Reference 
2012 (5) SCR 16 referred to Para 2 
2014 (~) SCR 493 referred to Para 3 
70JO (11) SCR 240 referred to Para3 
G 2012 (3) SCR 147 referred to Para 16 
2()12 (9) SCR 311 referred to Para 16 
2015 (~) SCR 411 relied on Para 24 
1996 (6) Suppl. SCR 368 relied on Para 24 
CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION : Contempt Petition (Civil) 
H No. 275of2016 in Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 374 of2012 in Civil 
•

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. S. L. SEAL ADDL. SECY. 155 
(STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA 
Appeal No. 2790 of2012. 
From the Judgment and Order dated 14.12.2007 of the High Com1 
ofOrissa at Cuttack in W. ~- (C) No. 6646 of2006. 
Maninder Singh, ASG., Kap ii Sibal, P. Chidambram, Sr. Advs., R. 
Balasubramanian, Prabhas Bajaj, Akshay Amritanshu, Ms. Aarti Sharma, 
A 
Gurmeet Singh Makker,Mahesh Agarwal, Ms. Radhika Gautam, B 
Ms. Sadapurna Mukharjee, E. C. Agrawala, Ashish Kumar Sinha, 
Shibashish Misra, Ad vs., with them for the appearing parties. 
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 
A. K. SIKRI, J. I. The erstwhile Bhushan Ltd. (predecessor­
in-interest of the petitioner) had proposed setting up of plant in some 
identified villages in the district ofSambalpur, Odisha. Forth is purpose, 
it had made a request for acquisition of land, measuring 1250 acres, 
which was acquired for Bhushan Ltd. It had also applied for grant of 
lease of mining of iron ore for use in the proposed plant. These applications 
were favourably considered by the State ofOdisha (hereinafter referred 
to as the 'State Government') which agreed to accord due priority to 
Bhushan Ltd. for grant of suitable iron ore areas and also agreed to 
recommend the proposal to the Government oflndia for grant of a coal 
block. Even a MoU was entered into between the State Government 
and Bhushan Ltd. containing the commitment of the State Government 
to recommend to the Central Government, grant of iron ore mines for its 
use in the proposed plant. For this purpose, area earmarked for 
recommendation were Thakurani area with 96 million tonnes iron ore 
reserves and Keora area, District Sundargarh for additional 128 million 
tonnes of iron ore; both for 50 years' requirement of the plant. Though 
various statutory and other permissions required for setting up of the 
plant were granted and the plant was also set up, but due to some in­
fight between the family members who owned Bhushan Ltd., it faced 
difficulties in getting the grant of iron ore lease. 
2. Insofar as granting of mining lease of iron ore reserves in the 
aforesaid areas is concerned, it fell into rough weather. It resulted into 
show-cause notice dated January 18, 2006 by the State Government 
which led to the decision that mining lease over the Thakurani area 
could not be allowed on various grounds and the application made by 
Bhushan Ltd. was premature. Thereafter, the Government of Orissa 
made a recommendation to the Central Government on February 09, 
2006 to grant mining lease in favour of one Mis Neepaz Metallics (P) 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

156 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS f20161 11 S.C.R. 
Ltd. in relaxation of Rule 59( I) of the Mining Rules, for a period of 30 
years. Challenging these orders, Bhushan Ltd. filed Writ Petition (Civil) 
No. 6646 of2006 in the High Court on May 08, 2006. This writ petition 
was dismissed by the High Court on December 14, 2007 and challenging 
this decision a special leave petition was filed in which leave was granted, 
thereby converting the special leave petition into Civil Appeal No. 2790 
of2012. This appeal was allowed by this Court videjudgment dated 
March 14, 2012, which was reported as Bllus/um Power & Steel Ltd. 
v. St"te of Oriss"' ·with the following directions: (SCC p. 256, paras 41-
42) 
"41 ... Accordingly, we allow the appeal and set aside the judgment 
and order of the High Court ofOrissa and also the decision of 
the State Government dated 9-2-2006, rejecting the appellant's 
claim for grant of mining lease. 
42. During the course of hearing, we have been informed that 
Thakurani Block A has large reserves of iron ore, in which the 
appellants can also be accommodated. We, accordingly, direct 
the State of Orissa to take appropriate steps to act in terms of 
the MoU dated 15-5-2002, as also its earlier commitments to 
recommend the case of the appellants to the Central Government 
for grant of adequate .iron ore reserves to meet the requirements 
of the appellants in their steel plant at Lapanga.l' 
3. It would be pertinent to mention that the State ofOdisha had 
filed a review petition seeking review of this judgment but the same was 
rejected vide order dated September 11, 2012. Pursuant to the aforesaid 
directions, though Bhushan Power & Steel Ltd. has been given Thakurani 
Block A, the order was not implemented qua Keora, District Sundargarh. 
The petitioner treated the aforesaid inaction on the part of the State 
Government' as ~ontemptuous and filed Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 
374 of2012=. This petition was contested by the respondents on various 
grounds. Main contention raised was that the direction given by this 
Court in its judgment dated March 14, 2012 was incapable of 
G enforcement. Forth is purpose, the State Government had placed reliance 
upon the subsequent judgment of this Court in S"ndur M"ng"nese "nd 
Iron Ores Limited·v. St"te of K"rn"t"k" & Ors.3 and submitted that 
• (2012) 4 sec 246 -
2 Bhushan Power and Steel Limited & Ors. v. Rajesh Verma & Ors., (2014) 5 ~C 
551 . 
H ' (2010) 13.SCC I

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. S. L. SEAL ADDL. SECY. 157 
(STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
in view of the law laid down in the said judgment, it was not possible to 
carry out the directions contained in the judgment rendered on Mar.ch 
14, 2012 passed in the case of the petitioner herein. 
4. Without going' into the niceties by stating the bas-is of the said 
plea taken by the State Government, suffice is to state that the aforesaid 
stand did not find favour with this Court. It was found that the contemnors/ 
officials of the State Government were in contempt of the orders dated 
March 14, 2012. In these circumstances, one more opportunity was 
given to the State Government to send requisite recommendation to the 
Central Government. However, for a better understanding of the nature 
of directions which were given, we reproduce following extracts from 
the judgment dated April 22, 2014 in the said Contempt Petition: 
"21. We cannot lose sight of the fact that there is a judgment, 
inter parties. which has become final. Even when the civil appeal 
was being heard, certain other parties claiming their interest in 
these very lands had moved intervention applications which were 
dismissed. At that time also it was mentioned that there are 195 
applicants. However, notwithstanding the same, this Court issued 
firm directions to the State Government to recommend the case 
of the petitioners for mining lease in both the areas. In view of 
such categorical and unambiguous directions given in the 
judgment which has attained finality, merely because another 
judgment has been delivered by this Court in Sandur Manganese 
case, cannot be a ground to undo the directions contained in the 
judgment dated 14-3-2012. Insofar as law laid down in Sandur 
Manganese is concerned, that may be applied and followed by 
the State Government in respect of other applications which are 
still pending. However. that cannot be pressed into service gua 
the petitioner whose rights have been i:ystal Ii zed by the judgment 
rendered in its favour. It cannot be reopened, that too at the 
stage of implementation of the said judgment. 
22. We would like to place on record the arguments of the 
learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner that the total area under 
notification is 731.67 sq km and out of this 406 sq km is yet to be 
allotted. The area which comes to the share of the petitioner 
underMoU is 13.91 sq km which is barely 3%of 406 sq km and, 
therefore recommendation by the State Government in favour 
of the petitioner cannot be stalled or put to naught only on the 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

158. 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2016] 11 S.C.R. 
basis of inchoate applications, fate whereof is yet to be decided. 
It is also pointed out that insofar as the petitioners in other writ 
petitions are concerned area claimed by them is not overlapping 
with the petitioner's area. However, it may not even be necessary 
to go into these contentions in detail. Once we hold that the 
respondents are bound to implement the direction contained in 
the judgment dated 14-3-2012, insofar as the State Government 
is concerned. it is obliged to comply therewith and such matters, 
along with other relevant considerations, can be left to the wisdom 
of the Central Government while taking a decision on the 
recommendation of the State Government. 
Xx xx xx 
24. As a consequence, we hold that the respondents/contemnors 
are in contempt oforders dated 14-3-2012 passed by this Court 
in not complying with the directions in respect of Keora area. 
However, we are giving one final opportunity to them to purge 
the contempt by transmitting requisite recommendations to the 
Central Government. It would be for the Central Government to 
consider the said recommendations on its own merits and in 
accordance with law. In case the recommendation is sent within 
one month from the date of copy of receipt of this order, we 
propose not to take any further action and the respondents/ 
contemnors shall stand discharged from this contempt petition. 
However, in case the respondents do not purge in the manner 
mentioned above, it would be open to the petitioners to point out 
the same to this Court by moving appropriate application and in 
that event the contemnors shall be proceeded against." 
5. According to the petitioner, the respondent State Government 
has not purged the contempt and, therefore, in view of the opportunity 
granted in the judgment dated April 22, 2014, as contained in paragraph 
24 extracted above, the petitioner has moved the instant Contempt Petition 
in which we have heard Mis. Kapil Sibal and P. Chidambaram, learned 
senior counsel for the petitioner, and Mr. Maninder Singh, learned 
Additional Solicitor General for the Union oflndia, and Mr. Ashish Kumar 
Sinha, Advocate for the State Government. 
6. We may mention at the outset that it is not disputed by the 
petitioner that after the directions dated April 22, 2014 given in the earlier 
Contempt Petition, the State Government had sent requisite

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. S. L. SEAL ADDL. SECY. 159 
(STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
recommendation to the Central Government for grant of mining lease in 
the area in question. The Central Government has, however, taken the 
view that having regard to the amendments in the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (for short, the 'Act'), vide 
Mine and Minerals (Development and Regulation)AmendmentAct, 2015 
(hereinafter referred to as the Amendment Act, 20 I 5) dated March 26, 
2015, the grant of mining lease has to be dealt with in accordance with 
the new provisions introduced by the Amendment Act, 2015 and under 
the new scheme, the petitioner's earlier request stands invalidated. This 
view of the Central Government is contained in its letters dated May 13, 
2015 and May 29, 2015 addressed to the State Government, with copies 
to the petitioner. The State Government has in turn written to the petitioner 
vide Jetter dated July 09, 2016 on the same lines. The petitioner has, 
however, taken the position that the amended sections have a saving 
provision, in which category the case of the petitioner falls, and in view 
thereof the approval of the Central Government is not even required 
and, therefore, the State Government was competent to grant the mining 
lease itself. It is for this reason the petitioner has impleaded Union of 
India as well, as respondent in the present proceedings and one of the 
prayers is to quash the letters dated May 13, 2015 and May 29, 2015 
issued by the Central Government, as well as the communication dated 
July 09, 2015 issued by the State Government. 
7. At this stage, we may reproduce the exact prayers made by the 
petitioner in this Contempt Petition: 
"{a) Initiate contempt of court proceedings against the 
Respondents/Contemnors and after hearing them, punish them 
for willfully flouting and deliberately disobeying the judgments 
and orders dated 14.3.2012 and 22.4.2014 passed by this Hon'ble 
Court in Civil Appeal No. 2790 of2012 and Contempt Petition 
(Civil)No. 374/2012 respectively. 
(b) Hold that the letters dated 13/05/2015 and 29/05/2015 issued 
by the Central Government (Annexure 9 & I 0) and letter dated 
09/07/2015 (Annexure 12) issued by the State Government are 
in breach and contempt of Judgments and Orders of this Hon 'ble 
Court and are thus of no legal consequence and effect. 
(c) Pass appropriate directions, directing the Respondents to 
comply with and implement the judgments of this Hon 'ble Court 
dated 14.3.2012 and 22.4.2014 passed by this Hon'ble Court in 
A 
8 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

160 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2016] 11 S.C.R. 
A Civil Appeal No. 2790 of2012 and Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 
374/2012 respectively and within two weeks ofreceipt ofnotice, 
to execute mining leases as recommended in Annexure Nos. P­
S and P-6. 
(d) Pass such other or further orders as this Hon'ble Court 
B may deem fit, just and proper in the facts and circumstances of 
the case." 
c 
8. As pointed out above, the petitioner accepts the fact that the 
State Government had in fact made the recommendation dated May 24, 
2014 to the Central Government for grant of mining lease over an area 
of 1063 .633 hectares in village Rakina, Marsuan, Tibira and in Khajurdihi 
RF (Keora Sector) in the districts of Keonjhar and Sundergarh. It is 
further stated that despite this recommendation, the Central Government 
did not take any action to grant the approval. In the meantime, on January 
12, 2015, the Central Government promulgated an Ordinance amending 
the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. This 
D Ordinance was made into an Act of Parliament on March 26, 2015 with 
effect from January 12, 2015. On May 13, 2015, the Central Government 
has issued a letter to the State Government, a copy whereof was also 
marked to the petitioner, stating that: 
E 
F 
"3. As per details available with the Ministry, this proposal for 
accord of prior approval for grant of mineral concession becomes 
ineligible as per the provisions of Section 1 OA(l) of the 
Amendment Act. Accordingly, the proposal should be treated 
as closed and necessary order may be ssued. The State 
Government may also ascertain whether the proposal is saved 
from ineligibility under the provisions of Section 1 OA of the 
Amendment Act, 2015 before communicating the same to the 
applicant and take fol lowing action in this matter: 
(i) if the proposal is ineligible, it may be treated as closed and 
necessary order may be issued; and 
G (ii) ifthe proposal remain eligible, the State Government (sic) 
bring it to the notice of the Ministry so that necessary action as 
per provisions of the Amended Act may be taken." 
9. A few days later, the Central Government wrote another letter 
dated May 29, 2015 regarding proposal for grant of ML for iron ore over 
H an area of 1390.663 hectares in village Rakma, Marsuan and Triba of

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. S. L. SEAL ADDL. SECY. 161 
(STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
Keonjhardistrict and Khajuridihi ofSundargah district stating as follows: 
"As per details available with the Ministry, this proposal for accord 
of prior approval for grant of mineral concession becomes 
ineligible as per the provisions of Section lOA(I) of the 
Amendment Act. The matter may be treated as closed. 
However, the State Government is advised to examine the 
proposal and in case there is strong case for the concession to 
be saved from ineligibility under the provision of Section 1 O(a) of 
the Amendment Act then this Ministry may be informed 
accordingly for further necessary action." 
10. Letter dated July 09, 2015 sent by the State Government to 
the petitioner rejecting the application of the petitioner for grant of mining 
lease reads as under: 
"And whereas, as per section-I OA( I) of MMDR Amendment 
Act, 2015, all applications received prior to the date of 
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development and 
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, shall become ineligible. 
And whereas, both the ML application No. 775 dated 04.12.2001 
and ML application No. 780 dated 01.03.2002 of the applicant 
company are the fresh applications seeking grant of mining leases, 
which have been recommended to Government oflndia prior to 
the date of commencement of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015. 
Therefore, after careful consideration of the facts & 
circumstances and materials on record, the State Government is 
pleased to reject the ML application No. 775 dated 04.12.200 I 
and ML application No. 780, dated 01.03.2002 of the applicant 
company being ineligible as per the provisions of section-I OA( 1) 
of the Amendment Act, 2015 ." 
11. It is in the aforesaid background, learned senior counsel 
appearing for the petitioner argued that the aforesaid approach of the 
Central Government as well as the State Government contained in their 
respective communications is totally misconceived inasmuch as direction 
of this Court, which is inter parties, still remain binding, notwithstanding 
the introduction of Section 1 OA by the Amendment Act, 2015. It is also 
argued that even if the said Amendment Act applies, case of the petitioner 
is preserved and protected under Section I OA(2)(C) of the Act. Section 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

162 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS f20161 11 S.C.R. 
I OA makes the following reading: 
"lOA. Rights of existing concession-holders and 
applicants. - (I) All applications received prior to the date of 
commencement of the Mines and Minerals (Development 
and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015, shall become 
ineligible. 
(2) Without prejudice to sub-secion (I), the following shall remain 
eligible on and from the date of commencement of the Mines 
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 
2015-
(a) applications received under section I IA of this Act; 
(b) where before the commencement of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Act, 2015 a 
reconnaissance permit or prospecting licence has been granted 
in respect of any land for any mineral, the permit holder or the 
I icensee shall have a right for obtaining a prospecting I icence 
followed by a mining lease, or a mining lease, as the case may 
be, in respect of that mineral in that land, ifthe State Government 
is satisfied that the permit-holder or the licensee, as the case 
may be,-
(i) has undertaken reconnaissance operations or prospecting 
operations, as the case may be, to establish the existence of 
mineral contents in such land in accordance with such 
parameters as may be prescribed by the Central Government; 
(ii) has not committed any breach of the terms and conditions 
of the reconnaissance permit or the prospecting licence; 
(iii) has not become ineligible under the provisions of this 
Act; and 
(iv) has not failed to apply. for grant of prospecting licence 
or mining lease, as the case may be, within a period of three 
months after the expiry ofreconnaissance permit or prospecting 
licence, as the case may be, or within such further period not 
exceeding six months as may be extended by the State 
Government. 
( c) where the Central Government has communicated previous 
approval as required under sub-section (I} of section 5 for grant 
of a mining lease, or if a letter of intent (by whatever name

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. S. L. SEAL ADDL. SECY. 163 
(STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
called) has been issued by the State Government to grant a mining 
lease, before the commencement of the Mines and Minerals 
(Development and Regulation)AmendmentAct, 2015, the mining 
lease shall be granted subject to ulfillment of the conditions of 
the previous approval or of the letter ofintent within a period of 
two years from the date of commencement of the said Act: 
Provided that in respect of any mineral specified in the First 
Schedule, no prospecting licence or mining lease shall be granted 
under clause (b) of this sub-section except with the previous 
approval of the Central Government." 
12. It was argued with vehemence that even when under sub­
section. (1) of Section 1 OA, all applications received prior to the date of 
commencement of the Amendment Act, 2015 have been rendered 
ineligible, sub-section (2) saves certain kinds of applications. Clause© 
thereof is invoked by the petitioner to submit that in the instant case 
since 'Letter of Intent' had been issued by the State Government to 
grant a mining lease, the petitioner's application stands protected. For 
this purpose, recommendation dated May 24, 2014 is treated as Letter 
of Intent by the petitioner, laying emphasis on the words 'fetter of intent 
(by whatever name called) '. It was, thus, argued that form of Letter 
of Intent is not necessary and the substance of the letter had to be seen. 
It was argued that since the letter dated May 24, 2014 of the State 
Government is in the nature of recommendation for grant of lease, it 
signifies intention to grant the mining lease insofar as the State 
Government is concerned and, therefore, in substance, it is the Letter of 
Intent. It was, thus, argued that under the new regime contained in 
Section I OA, approval of the Central Government was not even required 
and the State Government could have proceeded further and granted 
the lease. 
13. Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General, 
submitted, on the other hand, that the view taken by the Central 
Government in its communications dated May 24, 2014 and May 29, 
2015 is in accordance with the provisions of Section I OA of the Act. It 
was argued that letter dated May 24, 2014 cannot be treated as Letter 
of Intent as on the date of writing this letter, the State Government had 
no such power to give Letter oflntent without the prior approval of the 
Central Government. Therefore, it was only a request to the Central 
Government for considering the case of the petitioner favourably. It is 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

164 
A 
B 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2016] 11 S.C.R. 
further submitted that Letter oflntent mentioned in clause ( c) deals with 
the situations where sanction from the Central Government is received 
and Letter oflntent is issued but no formal lease executed. Only those 
cases are protected with. It was further submitted that after coming 
into effect the amended provision, the very methodology of grant of 
mining lease has tindergone a significant change inasmuch as now the 
leases are to be granted through auction, which is so specifically pr01 ided 
in the amended Section 11 of the Amendment Act, 20 I 5. It is for this 
reason, requirement of prior approval of the Central Government is 
dispense~ with. Learned Additional Solicitor General further submitted 
that there is no contempt of the orders of this Court inasmuch as the 
C only direction given in the impugned judgment dated March 14, 2012 
was to the State Government to send the recommendation, which direction 
was reiterated in the judgment dated April 22, 2014 passed in the Contempt 
Petition as well. The State Government complied with this direction by 
sending such a recommendation to the Central Government. Therefore, 
0 the present contempt petition was not even maintainable. Counsel for 
the State Government supported the aforesaid stand taken by the learned 
Additional Solicitor General. 
E 
F 
14. We have to bear in mind that the matter is being dealt with in 
a Contempt Petition. Therefore, what is to be seen is as to whether 
directions contained in the judgment are complied with or not. In the 
main appeal which was filed by the petitioner against the judgment of 
the Orissa High Court, it was allowed vide judgment dated March 14, 
2012. Direction was given to the State Government to send the 
recommendation for grant of mining lease to the petitioner. As per the 
law prevailing at that time, the role of the State Government was only to 
send the recommendation to the Central Government for allotting mining 
areas. Ultimate authority/power was vested with the Central Government 
to take a decision on the said request of the State Government. Since 
the State Government had even refused to send such a request, this 
Court-was of the view that the act of the State Government in refusing 
to send recommendation was contrary to the MoU dated May 15, 2002 
G and direction was issued to do the needful. In the order dated April 22, 
2014, passed in Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 374 of2012, this was 
made clear by observing that insofar as the State Government is 
concerned, it is obliged to comply therewith and such matters, along 
with other relevant considerations, can be left to the Central Government 
H while taking a decision on the recommendation of the State Government.

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. S. L. SEAL ADDL. SECY. 165 
(STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA [A. K,SIKRI, J.] 
We state at the cost of repetition that since the Union of India was not a 
party, no direction was given to it. On the contrary, it was left to the 
Central Government to take an appropriate decision on the 
recommendation of the State Government. This was made clear in para 
24 of the judgment dated April 22, 2014 by observing that it would be for 
the Central Government to consider the said recommendations on its 
own merits and in accordance with law. 
15. Since the State Government had sent the necessary letter of 
request to the Central Government, direction contained in the judgment 
dated March 14, 2012 stands complied with. The issue now raised, as 
reflected and discussed in the earlier portion of th is judgment, is whether 
the application of the petitioner is rendered ineligible in view of Section 
I OA of the Act or whether it still survives. We are examining this issue 
as the petitioner's counsel have argued that the petitioner is eligible to be 
considered as its application falls in the category carved out by clause 
( c) of Section 1 OA(2) and further that since no approval of the Central 
Government is required now, the State Government could itself grant 
the lease. It is argued that failure of the State Government amounts to 
contempt of the orders of this Court. 
16. Undoubtedly, as per sub-section (I) of Section IOA, all 
applications received prior to coming into force of the Amendment Act, 
2015, become ineligible. Reason for interpreting such a provision is not 
far to seek. Before the passing of the Amendment Act, 2015, it was the 
Central Government which had the ultimate control over the grant of 
licenses insofar as mining of major minerals is concerned. As per the 
procedure then existing, State Government could rec.ommend the 
application submitted by any applicant for grant of mining,.lease to the 
Central Government and the Central Government was given the power 
to grant or refuse to grant the approval. Thus, 'previous approval' · 
from the Central Government was essential for grant of lease, without 
which the State Government could not enter into any such lease 
agreement with the applicant. Shortcomings of this procedure were 
noticed by this Court in its judgment rendered in Centre/or Public 
Interest Litigation Vs. Union of Jndi~ (for short, 'CPIL case') and 
also in Re.: Sp/. Ref. No. I of 2012·'. In these judgments, this Court 
expressed that allocation of natural resources should normally be by 
auction. Judgment in CPIL case had a direct relevance to the grant of 
• (2012)3sec1 
' (2012) 10 sec 1 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

166 
A 
8 
c 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS (2016) 11 S.C.R. 
mineral concessions as the Government found that it was resulting in 
multipurpose litigation which was becoming counter productive. Mining 
Ordinance, 2015 was passed on January 12, 2015 which was ultimately 
replaced when the Parliament enacted the Amendment Act, 2015. · 
17. The exhaustive Statement of Objects and Reasons reveals 
that the extensive amendment in the Act were effected after extensive 
consultations and intensive scrutiny by the Standing Committee on Coal 
and Steel, who gave their Report in May, 2013. As is evident from the 
Statement that difficulties were experienced because the existing Act 
does not permit the auctioning of mineral concessions. It was observed 
that with auctioning of mineral concessions, transparency in allocation 
will improve; Government will get an increased share of the value of 
mineral resources; and that it will alleviate the procedural delay, which 
in turn would check slowdown which adversely affected the growth of 
mining sector. 
18. The Amendment Act, 2015, as is evident from the objects, 
D aims at: (i) eliminating discretion; (ii) improving transparency in the 
allocation of mineral resources; (iii) simplifying procedures; (iv) 
eliminating delay on administration, so as to_ enable expeditious and 
optimum development of the mineral resources of the country; (v) 
obtaining for the Government an enhanced share of the value of the 
E mineral resources; and (vi) attracting private investment and the latest· 
technology. 
19. The Amendment Act, 2015 ushered in the amendment of 
Sections 3, 4, 4A, 5, 6, 13, 15, 21 and First Schedule; substitution of new 
sections for Sections 8, 11 and 13; and, insertion of new sections 8A, 98, 
p 9C, JOA, IOC, 11 B, 11 C, I 2A, I 5A, 17 A, 20A, 308, 30C and Fourth 
Schedule. 
20. These amendments brought in vogue: (i) auction to be the sole 
method of allotment; (ii) extension of tenure of existing lease from the 
date of their last renewal to March 31, 2030 (in the case of captive 
G mines) and till March 31, 2020 (for the merchant miners) or till the 
completion of renewal already granted, if any, or a period of 50 years 
from the date of grant of such lease; (iii) establishment of District Mineral 
Foundation for safeguarding interest of persons affected by mining related 
activities; (iv) setting up of a National ,Mineral Exploration Trust created 
out of contributions from the mining lease holders, in order to have a 
H cledicated fund for encouraging exploration and investment; (v) removal

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. S. L. SEAL ADDL. SECY. 167 
(STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
of the provisions requiring 'previous approval' from the Central 
Government for grant of mineral concessions in case ofimportant minerals 
like iron ore, bauxite, manganese etc. thereby makingthe process simpler 
and quicker; (vi) introduction of stringent penal provisions to check illegal 
mining prescribing higher penalties up to ' 5 lakhs per hectare and 
imprisonment up to 5 years; and (vii) further empowering the State 
Government to set up Special Courts for trial of offences under the Act. 
2 LNewly inserted provisions of the Amendment Act, 2015 are to 
be examined and interpreted keeping in view the aforesaid method of 
allocation of mineral resources through auctioning, that has been 
introduced by the Amendment Act, 2015. Amended Section 11 now 
makes it clear that the mining leases are to be granted by auction. It is 
for this reason that sub-section (I) of Section I OA mandates that all 
applications received prior to January 12, 2015 shall become ineligible. 
Notwithstanding, sub-section (2) thereof carves out exceptions by saving 
certain categories of applications even filed before the Amendment Act, 
2015 came into operation. Three kinds of applications are saved. 
First, applications received under Section 11 A of the Act. Section 
11 A, under new avatar is an exception to Section 11 which mandates 
grant of prospecting license combining lease through auction in respect 
of minerals, other than notified minerals. Section ·I IA empowers the· 
Central Government to select certain kinds of companies mentioned in 
the said Section, through auction by competitive bidding on such terms 
and conditions, -as may be prescribed, for the purpose of granting 
reconnaissance permit, prospecting license or mining lease in respect of 
any area containing coal or lignite. Unamended provision was also of 
similar nature except that the companies which can be selected now for 
this purpose under the new provision are different from the companies 
which were mentioned in the old provision. It is for this reason, if 
applications were received even under unamended Section I IA, they 
are saved and protected, which means that these applications can be · 
processed under Section I IA of the Act. 
Second category of applications, which are kept eligible under the 
new provision, are those where the reconnaissance, permit o~ prospecting 
license had been granted and the permit holder or the licensee, as the 
case inay be, had undertaken reconnaissance operations or prospecting 
operations. The reason for protecting this class of applicants, it appears, 
is that such applicants, with hope to get the license, had altered their 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

168 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS f20 I 61 I I S.C.R. 
position by spending lot of money on reconnaissance operations or 
prospecting operations. This category, therefore, respects the. principle 
oflegitimate expectation. 
22. Third category is that category of applicants where the Central 
Government had already communicated previous approval under Section 
5( I) of the Act for grant of mining lease or the State Government had 
issued Letter oflntent to grant a mining lease before coming into force 
of the Amendment Act, 2015. Here again, the raison d'etre is that 
certain right had accrued to these applicants inasmuch as all the necessary 
procedures and formalities were complied with under the unamended 
provisions and only formal lease deed remained to be executed. 
It would, thus, be seen that in all the three cases, some kind of 
right,· in law, came to be vested in these categories of cases which led 
the Parliament to make such a provision saving those rights, and 
understandably so. 
23. Here, the petitioner seeks to cover its case under the third 
category with the plea that insofar as the State Government is concerned, 
it had issued 'Letter of Intent'. The petitioner is treating letter dated 
May 24, 2014, which was sent by the State Government to the Central 
Government with a request to the Central Government to give its approval 
for grant of mineral concessions, as the 'Letter of lntel1f '. It is in this 
hue, submission is that the intention behind the said letter is to be seen 
even ifit is not termed as 'Letter of Intent' and this argument is predicated 
on the words 'by whatever name called'. 
24. No doubt, having regard to the words 'by whatever name 
called', the expression 'Letter of Intent' is to be given wider connotation. 
It ~1eans that nomenclature of the Jetter would not be the determinative 
factor. It is the substantive nature of the letter in question that would 
determine as to whether it can be treated as the Letter of Intent. For 
this purpose, it is first necessary to find the meaning that has to be 
attributed to the term 'Letter of Intent'. As per the legal .dictionary, 
Letteroflntent is a document that described the preliminary understanding 
between the parties who intend to make a contract or join together in 
another action. This term has come up for interpretation on few occasions 
before this Court. In Rislli Kinm Logistics Private Limited v. Boanl 
of Trustees of Ka,,dla Port Trust and Otllers6, relying upon an eaflier 
6(201si 13 sec 233

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. S. L. SEAL ADDL. SECY. 169 
(STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA [A. K. SIKRI, J.] 
decision, this Court held that a Letter oflntent merely indicates a party's 
intention to enter into a contract with other party in future, as can be 
seen from the following para 43 thereof, which reads as under: 
"43. At this juncture, wh110.: keeping the aforesaid pertinent 
features of the case in mind, we would take note of"the Rules 
and Procedure for Allotment of Plots" in question issued by 
Kandla Port Trust. As per Clause 12 thereof the Po11 Trust had 
reserved with itself right of acceptance or rejection of any bid 
with specific stipulation that mere payment of EMO and offering 
of premium will not confer any right or interest in favour of the 
bidder for allotment ofland, Such a right to reject the bid could 
be exercised "at any time without assigning any reasons thereto". 
Clause 13 relates to "approvals from statutory authorities", with 
unequivocal assertion therein that the allottees will have to obtain 
all approvals from different authorities and these included 
approvals from CRZ as well. As per Clause 16, the allotment 
was to be made subject to the approval of Kandla Port Trust 
Board/competent authority. In view of this material on record 
and factual position noted in earlier paragraphs we are of the 
opinion that observations in Dresser Rand S.A. v. Bindal Agro 
Chem Ltd. would be squarely available in the present case, 
wherein the Court held that: (SCC p. 773, paras 39-40) 
"39 ... a letter of intent merely indicates a party's intention to 
enter into a contract with the other party in future. A letter of 
intent is not intended to bind either party ultimately to enter 
into any contract. ... 
40. It is no doubt true that a letter of intent may be construed as 
a letter of acceptance if such intention is evident from its terms. 
It is not uncommon in contracts involving detailed procedure, in 
order to save time, to issue a letter of intent communicating the 
acceptance of the offer and asking the contractor to start the 
work with a stipulation that the detailed contract would be drawn 
up later. If such a letter is issued to the contractor, though it may 
be termed as a letter of intent, it may amount to acceptance of 
the offer resulting in a concluded contract between the parties. 
But the question whether the letter ofintent is merely an expression 
of an intention to place an order in future or whether it is a final 
acceptance of the offer thereby leading to a contract, is a matter 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H

170 
A 
8 
c 
D 
E 
F 
G 
H 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS . f2016] 11 S.C.R. 
that has to be decided with reference to the terms of the letter." 
When the Loi is itself hedged with the condition that the final 
allotment would be made later after obtaining CRZ and other 
clearances, it may depict an intention to enter into contract at 
a later stage. Thus, we find that on the facts of this case it 
appears that a letter with intention to enter into a contract which 
could take. place after all other formalities are completed. 
However, when the completion of these formalities had taken 
undue long time and the prices ofland, in the interregnum, shot 
up sharply, the respondent had a right to cancel the process 
which had not resulted in a concluded contract." 
{See also Raj(lstltan Cooperative D"iry Federation Ltd. v. 
Malza Laxmi Mingrate M"rketing Service Pvt. Ltd. "nd 
Ors. 7 }. 
25. Applying the aforesaid meaning, can it be said that letter dated 
May 24, 2014 of the State Government wou Id constitute a Letter of 
Intent? We are afraid, answer has to be in the negative. Reason is 
simple. As mentioned above, in order to enable the State Government to 
enter into any lease agreement/contract with the prospecting licensee, 
'previous approval' of the Central Government was essential. Unless 
such approval came, the State Government could not communicate to 
the prospecting licensee/lessee its intention to enter into any contract as 
the pre-requisite prior approval would be lacking. Therefore, no promise 
could be held by the State Government to any applicant showing its 
intention to enter into a contract in the future. Position would have been 
different had letter dated May 24, 2014 been issued after receiving 
previous approval of the Central Government. However, that is not so. 
This letter to the Central Government was only recommendatory in nature 
and ultimate decision rested with the Central Government. It is a different 
thing if the Central Government refuses to give its approval on any 
extraneous reasons or ma/a fides or does not take into consideration 
relevant factors/material while rejecting the application, which may fonn 
a different cause of action and may become a reason to challenge the 
action of the Central Government rejecting the application on the grounds 
that are available in law to seek judicial review of such an action. 
However, we are not dealing with that situation in the instant case. Our 
discussion is confined to the plea raised before us, viz., whether letter 
1 (1996) 10 sec 405

BHUSHAN POWER & STEEL LTD. v. S. L. SEAL ADDL. SECY. 171 
(STEEL & MINES) GOVT. OF ODISHA [A. K. SIKRI, J.J 
dated May 24, 2014 can be termed as 'Letter of Intent'. For the reasons 
stated above, we are of the view that it was not a Letter of Intent. The 
application of the petitioner, therefore, would not be covered by clause 
( c) of Section I OA of the Act. 
26. We are conscious of the fact that the petitioner herein had 
originally succeeded in the appeal inasmuch as judgment dated March 
14, 2012 was rendered giving direction to the State Government to 
recommend the case of the petitioner, in terms of the MoU entered into 
between the parties, to the Central Government. This was not done and 
the decision was reiterated in orders dated April 22, 2014 passed in 
Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 374 of2012. It is possible that had the 
State Govenunent acted promptly and sent the recommendations earlier, 
the Central Government might have accorded its approval. However, 
whether it could have done so or not would be in the realm of conjectures. 
Insofar as the Central Government is concerned, no direction was ever 
given by this Court. On the contrary, it was categorically observed in 
the order dated April 22, 20 I 4 in Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 374 of 
20 I 2 that it would be for the Central Government to consider the 
recomn1endations of the State Government on its own merits and in 
accordance with law. If that has not been done by the Central 
Government, it cannot be the subject matter of present Contempt Petition. 
27. This Contempt Petition, thus, stands closed with the aforesaid 
observations. 
Ankit Gyan Contempt petition closed. 
A 
B 
c 
D 
E