[2013] 10 S.C.R. 279 
BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM LTD. (B.S.N.L.) & ANR. 
v 
S.K. BHATNAGAR & ORS. 
(Civil Appeal No. 9644 of 2013 ) 
OCTOBER 24, 2013 
[T.S. THAKUR AND VIKRAMAJIT SEN, JJ.] 
A 
B 
Service Law - Pension - Commutation of - Respondent 
retired from service of appellant-company - Prior to 
retirement, he had applied for commutation of his pension - C 
17 years after retirement, grievance raised by respondent in 
. regard to non-receipt of commuted pension amount - Held: 
Tribunal proceeded iri haste in not addressing the dispute in 
detail - High Court also passed a laconic order - Matter 
. remanded back to· High Court for complete and detailed D 
consideration of the matter. 
Respondent no.1 retired from the service of 
appellant-company on 31-5-1990. He had applied for 
commutation of his pension prior to his retirement but he E 
. had not received the commuted pension amount of 
Rs.87,400/.: and was not receiving his full pension. 
Application was filed by respondent no.·1 before the 
iribunal in the year 2007. The Tribunal observed that 
disputed questions of fact had arisen and, therefore, it F 
would not be proper for the Tribunal to decide the case, 
and yet went on to hold that it could not be concluded 
that the amount "of Rs.87 ,400/-had been paid to 
respondent no.1. On appeal, the High Court passed the 
impugned order whi,ch was challenged befo.re this Court. 
Allowing the appeal, the Court 
HELD: 1. While one appreciates that Respondent. 
no.1-claimant cannot prove the negative, viz., that he did 
G 
. 279 H 
3

280 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2013] 10 S.C.R. 
A not receive the cheque allegedly dispatched to him, the 
factum of the passage of 17 years would be good ground 
not to cast a presumption of law against the Appellants. 
Before this Court, a photocopy of the Cash Book 
maintained by the Appellants, presumably in the ordinary 
B course of business, has been furnished. It purportedly 
indicates that three Demand Drafts had been got issued, 
ostensibly against cash deposit. The Tribunal proceeded 
in haste in not addressing the dispute in detail. [Para 2] 
[282-C-E] 
c 2. Two facts are important - (a) that it is the case of 
Respondent no.1 himself that he applied for commutation 
of his pension before his retirement; and (b) that he was 
not receiving his full pension. This should have alerted 
any Adjudicating Authority to consider the veracity of his 
D claim without invoking the principle of 'presumption in 
law'. [Para 3] [282-G-H; 283-A] 
3. There is no alternative but to remand the matter 
back to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad for a 
E· complete and detailed consideration of the matter. It must 
consider all the _evidence collected by both the 
adversaries and come to a definite answer without 
resorting to fastening a 'presumption in law' on either 
party kee'ping the long passage of time in perspective. It 
F must also consider whether the claim stood barred by 
limitation, .or was pregnant of the possibility of being 
rejected for delay and !aches. [Para 4] [283-B-C] · 
Union of India v. Tarsem. Singh, (2008) 8 SCC 648 - held 
inapplicable. · · 
G 
Case Law Reference: 
-
(2008) s sec 648 held inapplicable Para 3 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 
H 9644 of 2013.

BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM LTD. (B.S.N.L.) v. S.K. 281 
BHATNAGAR 
From the Judgment & Order dated 22.11.2010 of the High A 
Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench at Lucknow 
in Writ Petition No. 1580 (S/B) of 2010. 
Dr. A.K. Gautam, Ashok Mathur for the Appellants. 
Y.S. Lohit, Dr. Sumant Bhardwaj, Mridula Ray Bharadwaj, 
Siddh.arth Sangal, Anil Kumar Sangal for the Respondents. 
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 
VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J. 1. Leave granted. 
2. This Appeal assails the Order passed on 22.11.2010 
by the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature at 
Allahabad in Writ Petition No.1580 (S/B) of 2010. Regretfully, 
it is a laconic order in respect of an extremely cryptic decision 
B 
c 
of the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT), Lucknow Bench, D 
Luckno'!V rendered on 7.1.2008 in Original Application No.153 
of 2007 .. In the impugned Order it has been noted that 
Respondent no.1 retired from the service of the Appellant­
company on 31.5.1990; he was serving as Telecom District 
Engineer (Chambal), Gwalior. It is also duly noted that E 
Respondent no.1 had applied for commutation of his pension. 
It stands admitted that he was receiving pension predicated on 
the commutation viz., not full pension. Neither of the Orders 
state the date of the application for commutation of pension, 
but in the hearing before us it has been indicated that this F 
request was made in 1988. The Appellants' submission before 
the Division Bench of the High Court was that a Cheque 
No.312436 dated 18.12.1990 had.been dispatched to 
Respondent no.1 at his Lucknow address. Before this Court, 
· the contention is that payment was made by a Demand Draft G 
bearing even number. It was in 2007 that Respondent no.1 filed 
the abovementioned Original Application before the CAT, 
Lucknow Bench which passed the aforementioned cryptic Order 
on 7.1.2008. Since Respondent no.1 had retired on 31.5.1990 
his grievance of having not received the commuted pension H

282 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2013] 10 S.C.R. 
A amount of Rs.87,400/-has come after the passage of 17 long 
years. It is palpably cl.ear that this inordinate delay has been 
glossed over in the impugned Order. So far as the CAT, 
Lucknow Bench is concerned it has firstly observed that 
disputed questions of fact have arisen and, therefore, it would 
B not be proper for the Tribunal to decide the case yet, inexplicably 
it has gone. on to opine that it cannot . be concluded th.at the 
. aforesaid amount of Rs.87,400/-had been paid to Applicant­
Respondent no.1. It has directed B.S.N.L. to furnish within one 
month valid proof of receipt of cheque by the Applicant-
C Respondent no.1, failing which an adverse inference would be 
drawn in law. While we appreciate that Respondent no.1-
claimant cannot prove the negative, viz., that he did not receive 
the cheque allegedly dispatched to him, the fact\,lm of the 
passage of 17 years would be ·good ground not to cast a 
D presumption of law against the Appellants. It appears that the 
State Bank of India has pleaded that the records, being more 
than ten years old, stand destroyed, and therefore no information 
in this regard could be furnished. In these circumstances how 
is the dispute to be decided. Before us, a photocopy of the 
Cash Book maintained by the Appellants, presumably in the 
E ordinary course of business, has been furnished. It purportedly 
indicates that three Demand Drafts had been got issued, 
ostensibly against cash deposit. The Tribunal proceeded in 
haste in not addressing the dispute in detail. 
F 3~ Learned counsel for Respondent no.1 has drawn our 
attention to -Union of India & Ors. v. Tarsem Singh (2008) 8 
. sec 648 wherein this Court has held that normally service 
matter claims are rejected either on limitation or on the grounds 
of delay/laches; the exception being cases of continuing wrong. 
G We cannot appreciate how this advances the case of 
Respondent no.1. Two facts are important - (a) that it is the 
case of Respondent no.1 himself that he applied for 
commutation of his pension before his retirement; and {b) that 
he was not receiving his full pension. This should have alerted 
H any Adjudicating Authority to consider the veracity of his claim

BHARAT SANCHAR NIGAM L "fD. (B.S.N.L.) v. S.K. 283 
BHATNAGAR [VIKRAMAJIT SEN, J.] 
without invoking the principle of 'presumption in law'. Tarsem A 
Singh, therefore, does not assist the case of Respondent no.1 
a wit. 
4. We find that there is no alternative but to remand the 
matter back to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad for a 
complete and detailed consideration of the matter. It must 8 
consider all the evidence collected by both the adversaries and 
come to a definite answ~J without resorting to fastening a 
'presumption in law' on either party keeping the long passage 
of time in perspective. It must also consider whether the claim 
stood barred by limitation, or was pregnant of the possibility of C 
being rejected for delay and laches. 
5. The impugned Order is accordingly set aside and the 
matter is remanded to the High Court for fresh adjudication. The 
Appeal is allowed accordingly. We hasten to clarify that nothing D 
contained in these presents shall be construed to indicate our 
views on the merits of the case. 
B.8.8. Appeal allowed.