A 
B 
[2017] 10 S.C.R. 278 
VISHNU BHAGWAN AGRAWAL & ANR. 
v. 
NATIONAL INSURANCE CO. LTD. 
(Civil Appeal No. 4661 of2007) 
OCTOBER 26, 2017 
[R. F. NARIMAN AND SANJAY KISHAN KAUL, JJ.] 
Arbitration - Appellant kept jute stock, which was insured -
Appellant subsequently purchased more stock of jute and asked 
C for increase in the value of the insurance policy - This, according 
to insurance company was not accepted - Raw jute involved in a 
fire incident - Dispute whether the insured stock should be valued 
as on the date of the fire or on the date of purchase - Appellant 
produced evidence in the form of purchase receipts of the value of 
stock of jute which amounted to Rs. 7031- per quintal - However, 
D this was not accepted in the survey done at the behest of the 
insurance company, the surveyors valued stock @ Rs.4041-per 
quintal by adopting the spot rate fixed in the market - Appellant 
invoked arbitration proceedings - /11 view of divergence of opinion 
between the arbitrators, the matter was referred to an Umpire -
E Umpire concluded that the insurance compa11y had accepted a11d 
agreed to the insured'.~ letter and property covered under policy in 
question stood increased in value and simply because an 
endorsement letter was not issued before the date of incidellt, it 
would not mean that insurance company can go back from its 
commitment - Courts below found the award passed by the Umpire 
F perverse - Insurance company contended that Umpire misconducted 
himself and that when insurance policy is written, it can be amended 
only in writing and not by the conduct of the parties - Held: The 
Umpire took a possible view in the facts of the case after having 
analysed the evidence before him - Though the insurance policy 
G was to be amended in the manner known to the law and that too in 
writing between the parties, yet estoppel by conduct was a ground 
the Umpire was well within his legal ken to hold - Further, in absence 
of anything to rebut the evidence produced on behalf of the 
appellant that the purchase price of the jute would reflect the market 
value as on the date of the fire, equally the umpire was well within 
H his legal bounds in arriving at conclusion, on facts, that the sum of 
278

VISHNU BHAGWAN AGRAWAL & ANR. v. NATIONAL 279 
INSURANCE CO. LTD. 
Rs. 7031-per quintal would reflect the market value of the jute stock A 
as on the date of fire - Insofar, as grounds for challenge are 
concerned, no legal error apparent on the face of the Umpire's 
award or misconduct in the sense of legal misconduct - Thus, the 
award by Umpire resuscitated. 
Allowing the appeal, the Court B 
HELD: 1. The Umpire took a possible view on the facts of 
the case having analysed the evidence before him and having 
arrived at the conclusion that the insurance policy was raised, 
given the conduct of the Insurance Company, not only in not 
replying to the letter dated 01.07.1985 (which showed that the C 
appellant purchased more stock of jute and asked for an increase 
in the value of the insurance policy) but also in adjusting the sum 
of additional premium. It is clear that though the insurance policy 
may have to be amended in the manner known to the law and that 
too in writing between the parties, yet estoppel by conduct is a 
ground the Umpire was well within his legal ken to hold. Further, D 
in the absence of anything to rebut the evidence produced on 
behalf of the appellant that the purchase price of the jute would 
reflect the market value as on the date of the fire, equally the 
umpire was well within his legal bounds in arriving at a conclusion, 
on facts, that the sum of Rs.703.23/-per quintal would reflect the E 
market value of the jute stock as on the date of the fire. [Para 8] 
[283-E-G] 
2. An arbitration award is not to be lightly interfered with. 
So far as the grounds for challenge are concerned, no legal error 
apparent on the face of the award or misconduct in the sense of F 
legal misconduct, i.e. that material evidence that is vital has been 
ignored, is made out on the facts of the present case. The 
arbitrator's findings can be said to be a possible one on the facts 
of the case. None of the findings are impeachable and therefore, 
the impugned judgment deserves to be set aside. The Umpire's 
award is thus resuscitated and payments that have to be made G 
under the Award shall be made by the Insurance Company. [Para 
10] [284-C-F] 
Polymat India (P) Ltd. & Am: v. National Insurance Co.· 
Ltd. & Ors. (2005) 9 SCC 174 : [2004] 6 Suppl. 
SCR 535 - referred to; H

280 
A 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2017] 10 S.C.R. 
Case Law Reference 
[2004) 6 Suppl. SCR 535 referred to Para6 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION: Civil Appeal Nos. 4661 
of2007 
B From the Judgment and Order dated 22.01.2004 of the High Court 
of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, Lucknow in First Appeal 
from Order No. 192 of 1997. 
Manoj Swamp, Ms. Lalita Kohli, Abhishek Swarup, Sajid Imam 
Naqvi (for Mis. Manoj Swarup and Co.), Ad vs. for the Appellant. 
C Vishnu Mehra and B. K. Satija, Advs. for the Respondents. 
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 
R. F. NARIMAN, J. I. The present appeal arises from the 
judgment of a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court dated 
0 22.01.2004, upholding the judgment of the learned Civil Judge dated 
22.04.1997, by which a learned Umpire's Award was set aside. 
E 
2. The facts of this case are that the appellant kept jute stock in 
the premises of Haryana Oil Mills situated at Lucknow, which was 
mortgaged in favour of the Bank of Baroda. The original peri?d for 
which this stock was insured was from I 3.10.1984 to 13.10.1985. It is 
not in dispute that as on 27.10.1984, the amount for which the jute was 
insured was raised from Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.20 lakhs. The entire stock 
pledged to the Bank was insured. By a letter dated 01.07 .1985, it appears 
that the appellant purchased more stock of jute and asked for an increase 
in the value of the insurance policy limited to Rs.25 lakhs and odd. This, 
F according to the Insurance Company, was not accepted and is one bone 
of contention between the parties. Another bone of contention between 
the parties is whether the insured stock should be valued as on the date 
of the fire or as on the date of purchase. 
3. The appellant before us produced evidence in the form of 
G purchase receipts of the value of stock of jute which amounted to 
Rs.703.21/-per quintal. However, this was not accepted in the survey 
that was done at the behest of the Insurance Company. By their report 
dated 07.10.1985, the Surveyors valued stock @ Rs.404/-per quintal 
on the basis that no authentic rate quotations were available in the 
Lucknow/Kanpur jute market. The Surveyors, therefore, adopted the 
H

VISHNU BHAGWAN AGRAWAL & ANR. v. NATIONAL 281 
INSURANCE CO. LTD. [R. F. NARIMAN, J.] 
spot rate quoted in the Calcutta market for W-5 quality jute, which was A 
adjusted to the qualities the insured had in stock, (which was W-4 and 
TD 5 quality jute), and after adding expenses incurred, an average rate 
of Rs.404/-per quintal for both qualities was worked out. The ultimate 
amount, therefore, that was offered by the Insurance Company, based 
on the Surveyor's report, came to a sum ofRs.12,30,039.4lnp. SiQ.ce B 
this was not accepted by the appellant, arbitration between the appellant 
and the respondent began. Mr. P.B. Agrawal, one learned Arbitrator, 
found in favourofthe appellant and awarded a sum ofRs.23,55, 132.71 p., 
with interest @ 10 % per annum from 101h March, 1986, up to the date 
of the Award and @ 6 % per annum from the date of the Award to the 
date of payment. Mr. P.P. Malhotra, another learned Arbitrator, came to C 
the conclusion that the limit of the fire insurance policy itself was Rs.20 
Lakhs and could not be exceeded and that the loss suffered by the 
claimant, as per the market value prevailing on the date of the fire, came 
to Rs.12,30,039.4 lnp as per the Surveyor's report. In view of this 
divergence of opinion between the arbitrators, the matter was referred D to an Umpire, namely Mr. S.C. Maheshwari, learned Senior Advocate. 
After considering the facts of the case, the learned Umpire concluded 
as follows: 
"It is thus clear that the Insurance Company had accepted and 
agreed to insured's letter dated 1.7.85 and the property covered 
under the policy in question stood increased from Rs.20 lakhs to E 
Rs.25, 45, 121.70 with effect from 1.7.85 to 13.10.85 and simply 
because an endorsement letter was not issued by the company 
before the date of happening, it would not mean that the Insurance 
Company can go back from its commitment. As discussed earlier, 
the first increment in the policy from Rs.10 lakhs to Rs.20 lakhs F 
was though effected from 27 .10.84 but the endorsement letter 
was issued by the company as late as 11.2.85 and had there 
been any happening in between 27.10.84 to 11.2.85, the company 
could not have taken the plea that the original policy was only 
for Rs. l 0 lakhs and the same was never increased. Having once 
given the implied consent, the Insurance Company is now G 
estopped from pleading that the sum insured was only Rs.20 
lakhs and not Rs.25,45, 121. 70 as claimed by the claimant. 
9. Keeping in mind the evidence led by the parties as well as the 
facts and circumstances attending to the present case, I am. of 
H

282 
A 
B 
c 
SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2017] 10 S.C.R. 
the firm opinion that as on I st July 1985, the sum insured of the 
policy stood increased to Rs.25,45,121.70 np (Rs.23, 13, 747 plus 
I 0 per cent) and the basis of loss settlement also stood amended 
to the cost price plus I 0 per cent instead of the market price. 
10. There is no dispute about the fact that the quantity of 
raw jute involved in the fire was 3122.72 quintals and the cost 
price of the same was Rs.703.21 per quintal. Both the figures 
have also been confirmed by the surveyor appointed by opposite 
party No. I. On this basis the cost price works out to Rs.21,95, 
927 .93 and since the basis of the loss settlement is cost price 
plus IO per cent, the amount works out to Rs.24, 15, 520.72." 
4. The learned Civil Judge, by his judgment dated 22.04.1997, 
found that the learned Umpire had misconducted himself on two counts; 
firstly, the fact that the letter dated 01.07.1985 which was sent by the 
appellant to the lnsurance Company, and no response thereto by the 
Insurance Company would be taken to mean that the proposal was 
D accepted. According to the learned District Judge, there can be no 
acceptance by implication or by conduct, and therefore, this part of the 
Umpire's award was set aside. Further, it was also held that the value of 
the goods should be at the time of the fire and since this is so, the purchase 
price of the said goods cannot be looked at. Therefore, both the 
E 
F 
conclusions of the learned Umpire were set aside on the ground that the 
Umpire misconducted himself, and the Umpire was directed to file his 
reconsidered award in light of the judgment of the learned District Judge 
within four months. An appeal from the aforesaid judgment was 
unsuccessful. The High Court basically reiterated the same conclusion 
as the learned District Judge and found the learned Umpire's Award to 
be perverse. 
5. The learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the 
appellant has urged before us that the Umpire's award is certainly a 
possible view that could be taken on the facts of the case. The learned 
District Judge, as well as the High Court, have exceeded their jurisdiction 
G in treating the Umpire's award as a first appeal. Equally, according to 
the learned counsel, the Umpire having taken Rs.703.21 as a figure per 
quintal of jute, did so on the basis of evidence produced before him and, 
as the fire occurred within an extremely short time from the date of 
purchase, the purchase price would certainly reflect the market value of 
H the said jute on the date of the fire. Equally, he placed the Surveyor's

VISHNU BHAGWAN AGRAWAL & ANR. v. NATIONAL 283 
INSURANCE CO. LTD. [R. F. NARIMAN, J.] 
report before us and stated that instead of arriving at a figure based on A 
the purchase price, the Surveyor was extremely arbitrary in going to the 
spot rate for different quality jute, in a completely different market; arriving 
at a much lower figure; and, therefore, the Umpire's award was not 
merely a possible view, it was the correct view on the facts of the case. 
Both the District Judge and the High Court were incorrect in holding B 
that the Umpire had misconducted himself and that his award is beyond 
jurisdiction. 
6. In reply, Shri Vishnu Mehra, appearing on behalf of the 
Insurance Company, has sought to place the judgments of the District 
Judge as well as the High Court before us, and has stated that it is 
obvious that the Umpire has misconducted himself on both the counts. C 
He relied upon the judgment of this Court in Polymat India (P)Ltd. & 
Anr. vs. National Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors.,(2005) 9 SCC 174, for · 
the proposition that when the insurance policy is written, it can be amended 
only i11 writing and nut by conduct of the parties, and that, therefore, the 
arbitrator's view was not a possible view in law on the facts of the case. D 
7. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. 
8. In our view, the learned Umpire took a possible view on the 
facts of the case having analysed the evidence before him and having 
arrived at the conclusion that the insurance policy was raised, given the 
conduct of the Insurance Company, not only in not replying to the letter E 
dated 01.07.1985 but also in adjusting the sum of additional premium. It 
is clear that though the· insurance policy may have to be amended in the 
manner known to the law and that too in writing between the parties, yet 
estoppel by conduct is a ground the Umpire was well within his.legal ken 
to hold. Further, in the absence of anything to rebut the evidence produced p· 
on behalf of the appellant that the purchase price of the jute would reflect 
the market vaiue as on the date of the fire, equally the umpire was well 
within his legal bounds in arriving at a conclusion, on facts, that the sum 
of Rs.703.23/-per quintal would reflect the market value of the jute 
stock as on the date of the fire. 
9. Shri Mehra, learned counsel for the Insurance Company, cited G 
a judgment Polymat India (P) Ltd. (supra) in reply and relied on 
paragraph 22, in particular, that when the terms of contract have been 
reduced to writing it cannot be changed without the mutual written 
agreement of both the parties. On the facts of that case, it was found in 
paragraph 14 that where three amendments to the policy were suggested H

284 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2017] IO S.C.R. 
A by the petitioner, the Insurance Company by its reply agreed to only one. 
B 
c 
This being the case, since the other two amendments were not, in fact, 
agreed to by the Insurance Company, the Court held that where the 
terms of a contract are in writing they cannot be changed without mutual 
agreement of parties. It is in this context that the Court held that mutuality 
is necessary to effect changes in an insurance policy. We have found on 
the facts of the present case that the Insurance Company would be 
estopped by conduct because of encashing and adjusting the enhanced 
insurance premium, which would lead to the limit being raised to over 
Rs.25 lakhs. We are, therefore, of the view that this judgment does not 
advance the respondent's case any further. 
I 0. It has been settled by a catena of judgments under the Arbitration 
Act, 1940, that an arbitration award is not to be lightly interfered with. 
So far as the grounds for challenge are concerned, no legal error apparent 
on the face of the award or misconduct in the sense of legal misconduct, 
i.e. that material evidence that is vital has been ignored, is made out on 
D the facts of the present case. The arbitrator's findings can be said to be 
a possible one on the facts of the case. We find that none of these 
findings are, therefore, impeachable and that, therefore, the impugned 
judgment deserves to be set aside. The Umpire's award is thus 
resuscitated by us, and payments that have to be made under the Award 
E 
F 
shall be made by the Insurance Company within a period of three months 
from the date of this judgment. Mr. Manoj Swarup, learned counsel for 
the appellant, states that the Bank is no longer involved in this matter, in 
that, all dues to the Bank have since been paid off. We accept this 
statement and, therefore, direct the Insurance Company to pay the 
appellant his dues within a period of three months from today. 
11. The judgment of the High Court is set aside. The appeal is 
allowed, and the Umpire's award is consequently upheld. 
Ankit Gyan Appeal allowed.