A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
133 
THE PRINCIPAL COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX-4, 
MUMBAI 
v. 
M/s. S.G . ASIA HOLDINGS (INDIA)PVT. LTD. 
(Civil Appeal No. 6144 of 2019) 
AUGUST 13, 2018 
[UDAY UMESH LALIT AND VINEET SARAN, JJ.] 
Income Tax Act, 1961: s.92 – Transfer Pricing Adjustment –
Respondent received certain amount of brokerage from its parent 
company – During the assessment proceedings, respon dent was 
directed to furnish details about the parent company and the rate 
of brokerage that was charged – According to the Assessing Of ficer, 
the brokerage charged by the respondent was only 0. 05% which 
was found to be at a lower rate as compared to the prevalent rates 
in market – Assessing Officer, therefore, while com puting the 
assessment made an addition of Rs.2,89,82,746/- under s.9 2 of the 
Act – Appellate Authority confirmed the addition ma de by the 
Assessing Officer – Tribunal set aside the findings re ndered by the 
first two authorities and held that Transfer Pricing Adjustm ent made 
by the Assessing Officer was contrary to the mandatory ins tructions 
issued by CBDT in its Instruction No.3/2003 dated 2 0.05.2003 – 
The view so taken by the Tribunal was affirmed by the High C ourt 
– On appeal, held: In view of the guidelines issued by the C BDT in 
Instruction No.3/2003 the Tribunal was right in obser ving that by 
not making reference to the Transfer Pricing Office r (TPO), the 
Assessing Officer had breached the mandatory instruc tions issued 
by the CBDT – Matter remitted to the Assessing Officer for making 
appropriate reference to the TPO – CBDT’s Instruction No.3/2003. 
CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION : Civil Appeal No. 6144 
of 2019. 
From the Judgment and Order dated 27.08.2018 by the High Court 
of Bombay in Income Tax Appeal No. 281/2016. 
Mahabir Singh, Sr. Adv., V. Girish Chowdary, H. R. Rao, 
Mrs. Anil Katiyar, Advs. for the Appellant. 
 [2019] 10 S.C.R. 133 
133

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
134 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2019] 10 S.C.R. 
Arijit Chakravarty, Arush Negi, Abhishek Tilak, Himanshu Tyagi, 
Advs. for the Respondent. 
The Judgment of the Court was delivered by 
UDAY UMESH LALIT, J. 
1. This Appeal by Special Leave challenges the judgment and 
final order dated 27.08.2018 passed by the High Court of Bom bay 
dismissing Income Tax Appeal No.281 of 2016 preferred by the appellant 
herein and thereby confirming the order dated 22.04.2015 passed by the 
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal (‘the Tribunal’, for short) in ITA No.2399/ 
Mum/2009. 
2. The facts leading to the filing of this Appeal are as under:- 
A) The respondent had received certain amount of brokerage
from its parent company. During the assessment 
proceedings the respondent was directed to furnish details 
about the parent company and the rate of brokerage that 
was charged. After the details were furnished, the
respondent was asked to establish if the parent company 
was involved in arbitrage activity and whether the rate 
charged was higher. After considering the material on 
record, according to the Assessing Officer, the brokerage 
charged by the respondent was only 0.05% which was 
found to be at a lower rate as compared to the prevalent 
rates in market. The Assessing Officer, therefore, while 
computing the assessment under Section 143(3) of the 
Income Tax Act, 1961 (‘the Act’, for short), by his order 
dated 27.12.2007 made an addition of Rs.2,89,82,746/- 
under Section 92 of the Act. 
B) The respondent being aggrieved preferred an appeal 
before the CIT(A) 1, who by his order dated 16.02.2009 
confirmed the addition made by the Assessing Officer 
and dismissed the appeal. The matter was carried further 
by filing ITA No.2399/Mum/2009 before the Tribunal. 
C) The Tribunal by its order dated 22.04.2015 set aside the 
findings rendered by the first two authorities and held that
1 Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals)

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
135 
transfer pricing adjustment made by the Assessing Officer 
was contrary to the mandatory instructions issued by 
CBDT 2 in its Instruction No.3/2003 dated 20.05.2003. 
While allowing the appeal, the Tribunal observed as under:- 
“16.1 After considering the entire judicial discussion
discussed hereinabove, in our considered opinion, the 
mandatory instructions issued by the Central Board 
of Direct Taxes cannot be brushed aside lightly. By 
not making reference to the Transfer Pricing Officer, 
the AO has breached the mandatory instructions 
issued by the CBDT thereby making the assessment 
order on this issue in violation of the provisions of 
the law. We, therefore, set aside the findings of the 
Ld. CIT(A) on this issue and hold that the Transfer 
Pricing Adjustments made by the AO in contradiction
to the mandatory instructions of the CBDT is bad in 
law. Here, we would like to make it clear that the 
assessment order is good but the Transfer Pricing 
Adjustments made therein are bad in law. Ground 
No.11 is therefore partly allowed. 
16.2 Before parting with this issue, the Ld. DR has 
emphasized that if the AO has not followed the 
mandatory directions, the case may be set aside to 
the file of the AO so that he may refer the matter to 
the TPO. We do not subscribe to this argument of 
the Ld. DR for the simple reason that the Tribunal is 
an Appellate Authority and therefore cannot interfere 
in the administrative matters which are mandatory 
as per the provisions of the Act. Reference to the 
TPO is an administrative matter which was supposed 
to be followed by the AO which he has failed to do 
so. The Tribunal cannot make any good to such lapse 
made by the AO. 
17. As we have held that T.P. Adjustments are bad 
in law, we do not find it necessary to dwell into the 
merits of the case. 
2 Central Board of Direct Taxes 
THE PRINCIP AL COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX-4, MUMBAI v. 
M/s. S.G . ASIA HOLDINGS (I) PVT. LTD. [UDA Y UMESH LALIT, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
136 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2019] 10 S.C.R. 
18. In the result, the appeal filed by the assessee is 
partly allowed. … …” 
3. The view so taken by the Tribunal was affirmed by the Hi gh 
Court which is presently under Appeal. We heard Mr. Mahabir Singh, 
learned Senior Advocate in support of the Appeal and Mr. Arijit 
Chakravarty, learned Advocate for the Respondent. 
4. Instruction No.3/2003 dated 20.05.2003 which weighed with 
the Tribunal and the High Court, is as under:- 
“Instruction No. 3/2003 
SECTION 92 OF THE INCOME TAX ACT, 1961 – TRANSFER 
PRICING – COMPUTATION OF INCOME FROM 
INTERNATIONAL TRANSACTION HA VING REGARD TO 
ARM’S LENGTH PRICE UNDER SECTION 92 – 
GUIDELINES TO TRANSFER PRICING OFFICERS AND 
ASSESSING OFFICERS TO OPERATIONALISE TRANSFER 
PRICING PROVISIONS AND TO HAVE PROCEDURAL 
UNIFORMITY. 
INSTRUCTION NO. 3/2003, DATED 20-05-2003 
(SUPERSEDED BY INSTRUCTION NO.15/2015 (F.NO.500/ 
9/2015-APA-II), DATED 16-10-2015) 
The provisions relating to transfer price contained in sections 92 
to 92F of the Income-tax Act, have come into force with effect
from assessment year 2002-03. In terms of the provisions, income 
from an international transaction is to be computed having regard 
to arm’s length price between the associated enterprises. Further, 
in terms of Section 92CA, a Transfer Pricing Office r, on a 
reference received from the Assessing Officer, is re quired to 
determine arm’s length price of an international transaction by an 
order and the Assessing Officer is required to compute the income 
having regard to the price so determined by the TPO. T he 
notification regarding jurisdiction of TPOs and their controlling
officers have been issued by the Central Board of Direct Taxes 
and the copies thereof are enclosed for ready refere nce as 
Annexure II. In order to maintain uniformity of procedure and to
ensure that work in this important area proceeds smoothly and
effectively, the following guidelines are hereby issued:

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
137 
(i) Reference to Transfer Pricing Officer (TPO):- The Power 
to determine arm’s length price in an international transaction is 
contained in sub-section (3) of section 92C. However, sect ion 
92CA provides that where the Assessing Officer consider s it 
necessary or expedient so to do, he may refer the computation of 
arm’s length price in relation to an international transaction to the 
TPO. Sub-section (3) of section 92CA provides that the T PO 
after taking into account the material available with him shall, by 
an order in writing, determine the arm’s length price in accordance 
with sub-section (3) of section 92C. Sub-Section (4) of secti on 
92CA provides that on receipt of the order of the TP O, the 
Assessing Officer shall proceed to compute the total income of 
the assessee having regard to the arm’s length price, determined 
by the TPO. Thus, whereas the determination of the arm’s length 
price, wherever reference is made to him, is required to be done 
by the TPO under sub-section (3) of section 92CA, read with 
sub-section (3) of section 92C, the computation of total inco me 
having regard to the arm’s length price so determined by the TPO 
is required to be done by the Assessing Officer under sub-section 
(4) of section 92C, read with sub-section (4) of section 92CA. 
In order to make a reference to the TPO, the Assessing Officer 
has to satisfy himself that the taxpayer has entere d into an 
international transaction with an associated enterprise. On e of 
the sources from which the factual information rega rding 
international transaction can be gathered is Form No.2CEB filed 
with the return which is in the nature of an accountant’s re port 
containing basic details of an international transaction entered into 
by the taxpayer during the year and the associated ente rprise 
with which such transaction is entered into, the nature of documents 
maintained and the method followed. Thus, the primary details 
regarding such international transactions would normally be 
available in the accountant’s report. The Assessing Office r can 
arrive at prima facie belief on the basis of these details whether 
a reference is considered necessary. No detailed enquiries are 
needed at this stage and the Assessing Officer should not embark 
upon scrutinizing the correctness or otherwise of the price of the 
international transaction at this stage. In the initi al years of 
implementation of these provisions and pending development of 
adequate database, it would be appropriate if a small number of 
THE PRINCIP AL COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX-4, MUMBAI v. 
M/s. S.G . ASIA HOLDINGS (I) PVT. LTD. [UDA Y UMESH LALIT, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
138 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2019] 10 S.C.R. 
cases are selected for scrutiny of transfer price and th ese are 
dealt with effectively. The Central Board of Direc t Taxes, 
therefore, have decided that wherever the aggregate value of 
international transaction exceeds Rs.5 crores, the case should be 
pricked up for scrutiny and reference under section 92CA be made 
to the TPO. If there are more than one transaction wi th an 
associated enterprise or there are transactions with more than 
one associated enterprises the aggregate value of which exceeds 
Rs.5 crores the transaction should be referred to TPO. Befo re 
making reference to the TPO, the Assessing Officer has to seek 
approval of the Commissioner/Director as contemplated under 
the Act. Under the provisions of section 92CA reference is in 
relation to the international transaction. Hence all transactions 
have to be explicitly mentioned in the letter of reference. Since 
the case will be selected for scrutiny before making reference to 
the TPO, the Assessing Officer may proceed to examine other 
aspects of the case during pendency of assessment proceedings 
but await the report of the TPO on the value of internationa l 
transaction before making final assessment. 
The threshold limit of Rs.5 crores will be reviewed depending 
upon the workload of the TPOs. 
The work relating to selection of cases for scrutiny and reference 
to TPO on the above basis in respect of pending returns filed for 
the assessment year 2002-03 should be completed by June 30, 
2003. 
(ii) Role of Transfer Pricing Officer:- The role of the TPO 
begins after a reference is received from the Assessing Officer. 
In terms of section 92CA this role is limited to the determination 
of arm’s length price in relation to the international transaction(s) 
referred to him by the Assessing Officer. If during the course of 
proceedings before him it is found that there are certain ot her 
transactions; which have not been referred to him by the Assessing 
Officer, he will have to take up the matter with the Asse ssing 
Officer so that a fresh reference is received with reg ard to such 
transactions. It may be noted that the reference to the TPO i s 
transaction and enterprise specific. 
The transfer price has to be determined by the TPO in terms of 
section 92C. The price has to be determined by any one of the

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
139 
methods stipulated in sub-section (1) of section 92C and by applying 
the most appropriate method referred to in sub-section (2) thereof. 
There may be occasions where application of the most appropriate 
method provides results which are different but equally reliable. 
In all such cases, further scrutiny may be necessary to eval uate 
the appropriateness of the method, the correctness of the data,
weight given to various factors and so on. The selection of the 
most appropriate method will depend upon the facts of the case 
and the factors mentioned in rules contained in rule 10C. The 
TPO after taking to account all relevant facts and data available 
to him shall determine arm’s length price and pass a sp eaking 
order after obtaining the approval of the DIT (TP). The or der 
should contain details of the data used, reasons for arriving at a 
certain price and the applicability of methods. It may be 
emphasized that the application of method including the application 
of the most appropriate method, the data used, factors governing 
the applicability of respective methods, computation of price under 
a given method will all be subjected to judicial scrutin y. It is, 
therefore, necessary that the order of the TPO contains adequate 
reasons on all these counts. Copies of the documents or the
relevant data used in arriving at the arm’s length price should be 
made available to the Assessing Officer for his records and use 
at subsequent stages of appellate or penal proceedings. 
(iii) Role of the Assessing Officer after receipt of “arm’s length 
price”: Under sub-section (4) of section 92C, the Assessing 
Officer has to compute total income of the assessee having regards 
to the arm’s length price so determined by the TPO. While sub- 
section (4) of section 92CA clearly provides that such computation 
of income will be made having regard to the arm’s length price so 
determined by the TPO, it is imperative that a formal opportunity 
is given to the taxpayer before making adjustments to the total 
income. The opportunity with regard to the determination of arm’s 
length price has already been given by the TPO and, therefore, 
opportunity by the Assessing Officer, for final determination of 
income under sub-section (4) of section 92C, read with sub-section 
(4) of section 92CA is to be given by the Assessing Officer. 
(iv) Maintenance of database: It is to be ensured by the DIT 
(Transfer Pricing) that the reference received from the Assessing 
THE PRINCIP AL COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX-4, MUMBAI v. 
M/s. S.G . ASIA HOLDINGS (I) PVT. LTD. [UDA Y UMESH LALIT, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
140 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2019] 10 S.C.R. 
Officer is dealt with expeditiously so as to leave the As sessing 
Officer with sufficient time to offer an opportunity of being heard 
of the taxpayer before computing the income and completing the
assessment. In order to ensure that all the references are attended 
to timely and effectively, a record of all such developments should 
be maintained in the format enclosed as Annexure I to t hese 
guidelines. This format will also serve as an important data base 
for future action and also help ensure uniformity i n the 
determination of “arm’s length price” in identical or substantially 
identical cases. 
These instructions are under Section 119 of the Income-tax Act. 
ANNEXURE I 
Register of record to be maintained by Transfer Pricing 
Officer 
ANNEXURE II 
Order under section 120, read with section 92CA of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, dated April, 2003 
In exercise of the power conferred by sub-section 
(1) and sub-section (2) of section 120 of the 
Income-tax Act, 1961, the Central Board of Direct 
Taxes hereby directs that the Transfer Pricing 
Officers mentioned in column 2 having their 
headquarters mentioned in column 3 shall exercise 
such powers and perform such function of Transfer 
Pricing Officers as mentioned in Section 92CA 
for the purpose of sections 92C and 92D of the 
Act, in respect of persons or classes of persons 
mentioned in column 5:” 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 11 1 2 13
S l.N o. D a te of 
rec e ip t 
of 
ref e re n c e 
fro m 
A .O . 
N a m e of 
th e A .O . 
m a kin g 
r e fe re n c e 
N a m e 
a n d 
a d dr e ss 
o f th e 
ta x 
p a ye r 
a n d 
n a tur e 
o f 
b usi ne ss 
N a ture a n d 
qu a ntu m o f 
inte rn a tio na l 
tra n sa c tion 
a s p e r 
se c tio n 9 2B 
a nd 
a sse ssm e n t 
ye a r 
N a m e a nd 
a d d r e ss o f 
t he 
a s soc ia te d 
e n te r prise 
a n d th e 
c o u n tr y in 
w h ic h it 
i s r e sid en t 
N a tur e of 
a sso c ia tion 
a s pe r 
se c tio n 
92 A 
D a te of 
issu e of 
n o tic e 
to 
ta x pa ye r 
T r an sfe r 
p ric e a s 
ta ke n by 
th e 
ta x pa y er 
A r m s 
le n gth 
p ric e as 
d et er m ine d 
b y th e 
T ran sf e r 
P ric ing 
O f fi ce r 
u n d e r 
se c tio n 
9 2 C A (3 ) 
M e tho d 
a p p lie d 
R ef e re nc e 
to a ny 
d a ta ba se 
a d o p te d 
b y T P O 
` D a te of 
d e sp a tc h 
o f th e 
o rd e r of 
th e A .O .

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
141 
5. It was submitted by Mr. Mahabir Singh, learned Senior Advocate 
that the expression “….. the Assessing Officer considers it necessary 
or expedient so to do, he may, with the previous ap proval of the 
Commissioner, refer the computation of the arm’s len gth price in 
relation to the said international transaction or speci fied domestic 
transaction under Section 92C to the Transfer Prici ng Officer” 
occurring in Section 92CA of the Act signified that discretion was vested 
in the Assessing Officer and it would not be mandatory in every single 
case that he must refer the issue of computation of the Arm’s Length 
Price to the TPO 3.
6. However, the following expressions employed in Instruction
No.3/2003 put the matter in a different perspective: - 
“… ...The Assessing Officer can arrive at prima facie belief on 
the basis of these details whether a reference is co nsidered 
necessary. No detailed enquiries are needed at this stage and the 
Assessing Officer should not embark upon scrutinizin g the 
correctness or otherwise of the price of the intern ational 
transaction at this stage… … If there are more tha n one 
transaction with an associated enterprise or there are transactions 
with more than one associated enterprise the aggregate value of
which exceeds Rs.5 crores, the transactions should be referred
to the TPO. … …Since the case will be selected for scrutiny 
before making reference to the TPO, the Assessing Officer m ay 
proceed to examine other aspects of the case during pendency of 
assessment proceedings but await the report of the TPO on t he 
value of international transaction before making final assessment. 
… … 
(vi) Role of the Assessing Officer after receipt of “arm’ s 
length price”: Under sub-section (4) of section 92C, the 
Assessing Officer has to compute total income of the assess ee 
having regard to the arm’s length price so determined by the TPO.” 
7. In view of the guidelines issued by the CBDT in Instructi on 
No.3/2003 the Tribunal was right in observing that by not making 
reference to the TPO, the Assessing Officer had breached the mandatory 
instructions issued by the CBDT. We do not find the conclusion s o 
arrived at by the Tribunal to be incorrect. 
3 Transfer Pricing Officer 
THE PRINCIP AL COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX-4, MUMBAI v. 
M/s. S.G . ASIA HOLDINGS (I) PVT. LTD. [UDA Y UMESH LALIT, J.]

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
142 SUPREME COURT REPORTS [2019] 10 S.C.R. 
8. However, the Tribunal ought to have accepted the submission
made by the Departmental Representative as quoted in para 16.2 of its 
order and the matter ought to have been restored to the file of the 
Assessing Officer so that appropriate reference could be made to the 
TPO. It would therefore be upto the authorities and the Commissioner 
concerned to consider the matter in terms of Sub-Section (1) of Section 
92CA of the Act. 
9. We, therefore, allow this Appeal to the aforesaid extent and 
direct that it would now be upto the Assessing Officer to take appropriate 
steps in terms of Instruction No.3/2003. 
10. The Appeal is allowed to the aforesaid extent. No costs. 
Devika Gujral Appeal allowed.